[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, kindly forgive my hyperbolic entry into the episode
[Amit Varma]: and for getting your hopes up. I'm not sure even dreamers can save us to be honest. Too
[Amit Varma]: much of my commentary on the show in recent times has been all gloom and doom. But what
[Amit Varma]: to do that is indeed the state of our nation and our economy and our governance today.
[Amit Varma]: So I thought I'd do an episode where I get some of the sharpest thinkers I've had on
[Amit Varma]: the show to get together and propose what I term dream reforms. I have three guests
[Amit Varma]: on the show today, a record, and each of us will propose three dream reforms that we'd
[Amit Varma]: really love to see. And so will I. So that's a total of 12 dream reforms, each of them
[Amit Varma]: proposed by one of us but discussed by all of us. My guests today are Vivek Kaul, Shruti
[Amit Varma]: Rajagopalan and Rajeshwari Sengupta. I take their names in this order, because I am grouping
[Amit Varma]: them by the frequency of their appearances on the scene and the unseen. Vivek has appeared
[Amit Varma]: on a whopping 16 episodes of the show. And I'm beginning to think that he and I should
[Amit Varma]: just get a, not get a room but a separate show of our own so others get a chance on
[Amit Varma]: this one. Watch this space. Shruti meanwhile has appeared on 11 episodes of the scene and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen and was delighted to get an invite in this episode so she could catch up with
[Amit Varma]: Vivek till she realized he was also on it. Tough luck Shruti. Rajeshwari has appeared
[Amit Varma]: just once on the show. But Sachin Tendulkar had played just one test match at the time
[Amit Varma]: of his second test match and we all know what happened next. Before I begin my ludicrously
[Amit Varma]: exciting episode with these remarkable peoples, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Did you know that Parsis in Mumbai, instead of being left at the Tower of Silence after
[Amit Varma]: they died, are now cremated? And why? Because a cow fell sick in the early 1990s? Did you
[Amit Varma]: know that the smog in Delhi is caused by something that farmers in Punjab do and that there's
[Amit Varma]: no way to stop them? Did you know that there wasn't one gas tragedy in Bhopal but three?
[Amit Varma]: One of them was seen but two were unseen? Did you know that many well-intentioned government
[Amit Varma]: policies hurt the people they're supposed to help? Why was demonetization a bad idea?
[Amit Varma]: How should GST have been implemented? Why are all our politicians so corrupt when not
[Amit Varma]: all of them are bad people? I'm Amit Verma and in my weekly podcast, The Seen and the
[Amit Varma]: Unseen, I take a shot at answering all these questions and many more. I aim to go beyond
[Amit Varma]: the scene and show you the unseen effects of public policy and private action. I speak
[Amit Varma]: to experts in economics, political philosophy, cognitive neuroscience and constitutional
[Amit Varma]: law so that the insights can blow not only my mind but also yours. The Seen and the Unseen
[Amit Varma]: releases every Monday. So do check out the archives and follow the show at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: You can also subscribe to The Seen and the Unseen on whatever podcast app you happen
[Amit Varma]: to prefer.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, Vivek, Rajeshwari, welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Guest 1]: Hi Amit.
[Guest 3]: Hi Amit.
[Guest 3]: Hi Amit, glad to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so let's let's kind of get straight down to business. I mean, we are just playing
[Amit Varma]: this by ear. All of us have like three reforms, which we have decided not to share with each
[Amit Varma]: other in advance. So I have no idea what these people are going to come up with. And there
[Amit Varma]: is a grave danger that they might talk about my reform before I do. The order will be going
[Amit Varma]: in is Shruti first, followed by Vivek, followed by Rajeshwari, followed by me. And I sound
[Amit Varma]: too much like a schoolteacher at this point. And the thing is, I'm one of them. I mean,
[Guest 3]: there are two other teachers on the show. Shruti, why don't we do ladies first?
[Amit Varma]: Please not. So ladies first hi toh kar rahe the.
[Amit Varma]: Haan to ladies first.
[Amit Varma]: No ladies as in, I think he means Shruti first and then me. Let's just go by this order.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so Shruti, most of my shows with you have happened on Skype. How do you feel you
[Amit Varma]: are here in person in the studio?
[Guest 1]: I'm hoping that someone buys me lunch. That's the only reason I'm in the studio.
[Amit Varma]: Oh my god, that's that's the advantage of Skype recordings. You don't have to buy lunch
[Amit Varma]: for your guests.
[Guest 1]: No, it's a pleasure to be here. And so much for catching up with Vivek. But it's okay,
[Amit Varma]: we'll find another time.
[Amit Varma]: Let's get straight to our reforms. What's your first reform, Shruti?
[Guest 1]: This is no surprise. I think the biggest thing going on is the jobs crisis. It's very strongly
[Guest 1]: linked to the economic downturn. And it's going to become more acute because of the
[Guest 1]: slowdown that the economy is experiencing. So I think the very first thing that we need
[Guest 1]: to do is address the fact that we have too many people entering the job market and not
[Guest 1]: enough jobs to go around. And this seems to be true pretty much at every level. So just
[Guest 1]: in broad terms, the country is incredibly young, right? 50% of the country is below
[Guest 1]: 25 or thereabouts. And all these people are young, fresh out of school or college or whatever
[Guest 1]: their skill level is, they're all looking for jobs. The numbers were about 12 to 13
[Guest 1]: million people looking for jobs, plus another 6 million odd attempting to leave agriculture.
[Guest 1]: And you know, so it was estimated about 20 million jobs a year. Now, because we failed
[Guest 1]: to create 20 million jobs in the last five or six years, there's a further backlog, right?
[Guest 1]: Because just because they didn't get a job the first year, they might be underemployed
[Guest 1]: or sort of looking for employment. But those people are also sort of looking for a job.
[Guest 1]: So the numbers, we don't have clear numbers on how many people are looking for a job each
[Guest 1]: year, but it's about 20 million plus is a conservative estimate entering the workforce
[Guest 1]: every year. And we are creating nowhere close to those number of jobs, right? And a big
[Guest 1]: part of this is because the regulatory system doesn't allow easy hiring and easy firing.
[Guest 1]: So the easier it is to fire someone, the easier it is to hire someone, right? So that's the
[Guest 1]: biggest problem caused by the Indian sort of wage regulatory structure. Added to this
[Guest 1]: is other things like you have inspection systems. So they really clamp down on industries, mostly
[Guest 1]: manufacturing, where if you don't follow the labor laws, there's a host of labor inspectors
[Guest 1]: who are just sort of, you know, capturing the rents coming out of this regulatory system.
[Guest 1]: So they're incredibly corrupt. They make it very difficult for small firms to function.
[Guest 1]: In response, the government decided to pass quite recently, maybe a couple of weeks ago,
[Guest 1]: the wage code for 2019. All that the code does, to my knowledge, is compiles four previous
[Guest 1]: acts, the Payment of Wages Act, the Minimum Wages Act, the Payment of Bonus Act, and Equal
[Guest 1]: Renumeration Act, right? So they've just sort of done what they do best. They've given it
[Guest 1]: a new name. They haven't made any real reform in making it cheaper. They've actually made
[Guest 1]: it harder. They've brought in about 500 million people in India under the ambit of the code
[Guest 1]: bill. And it comes with a penalty, including domestic work. And there's a penalty for not
[Guest 1]: paying minimum wage, which is well above market wage. Like the minimum wage seems to have
[Guest 1]: no relevance in reality to what's actually going on in the market. And there is a huge
[Guest 1]: penalty, both fines and criminal penalty, for not paying minimum wage. And there is
[Guest 1]: no enforcement mechanism. I don't know if that's good or bad. That's probably good.
[Guest 1]: Because that way more people can be hired. But it also because of pernicious enforcement
[Guest 1]: and arbitrary enforcement, you know, it would be harder for manufacturing units hoping to
[Guest 1]: hire more people below minimum wage or something to actually go and do it. So this is the mess
[Guest 1]: we're in. So what this probably requires is sort of scrapping the existing labor laws,
[Guest 1]: and just really simplifying it, right? And the next is getting rid of the labor inspection
[Guest 1]: system. Whatever is a problem should be solved contractually, like any other contract, right?
[Guest 1]: This labor inspection system, which is sort of like the government holding a danda above
[Guest 1]: every employer's head, that is really what's causing the jobs crisis problem. So this,
[Guest 1]: I mean, we can talk about this a little bit more, it's very hard to do this reform, because
[Guest 1]: of the unions. And there is obviously winners and losers in every reform, the unions will
[Guest 1]: lose and a very vast number of people in the informal economy and those who are unemployed
[Guest 1]: will gain. But the unions are well organized. And the people in the economy who are unemployed
[Guest 1]: and those who in the informal economy are not organized. And that makes it very difficult
[Guest 1]: to break this stronghold.
[Amit Varma]: And also, is there a central law, state laws, that kind of thing?
[Guest 1]: So there are state amendments. So there are a host of central laws, you know, like the
[Guest 1]: Industrial Disputes Act, and so on. And each state can amend those. So some of the amendments
[Guest 3]: are better than some of us, like some states do better than us.
[Guest 3]: Basically, there are around 44 central government laws. And there are around 200 state government
[Guest 3]: laws. So basically, you know, a few years back, Amit Mitra, who now is the finance minister
[Guest 3]: of West Bengal, said that, at any point of time, you might be breaking some labor law
[Guest 3]: without even realizing it, because there's so many of them out there.
[Guest 2]: So Shruti, I think that's an excellent point. But one question that I had is, and this is
[Guest 2]: just because I'm not very well aware of this particular field, which is that, even I hear
[Guest 2]: that even in the formal sector today, there's a lot of contractualization of labor that's
[Guest 2]: going on. And that actually took me by surprise, because I was thinking that contractualization
[Guest 2]: happens more in the informal sector. But I keep hearing for the last five years, this
[Guest 2]: has taken up massively in the formal sector. And I'm guessing this is obviously not optimal,
[Guest 2]: because you're essentially working around the laws. And this also breeds insecurity,
[Guest 2]: because these workers are not getting pension payments and other kinds of benefits. So would
[Guest 2]: you have any thoughts on this? And if I may also add, and this is a broader point is,
[Guest 2]: I don't completely think that the jobs crisis is because of labor laws, because our labor
[Guest 2]: laws have been rigid and have been complicated and have been many and scattered for a very
[Guest 2]: long period of time. And the jobs crisis, essentially speaking, has been brewing over
[Guest 2]: the last few years. And it has actually broken out of the thing and everybody's talking about
[Guest 2]: it over the last few years. And that perhaps also has a lot to do, and as you rightly mentioned,
[Guest 2]: with the economic slowdown, which is basically, there's a manufacturing sector crisis that
[Guest 2]: has been also brewing for a long time, there is a credit market crisis that's happening
[Guest 2]: for quite some time. And as a result, there is a demand slowdown that's happening, which
[Guest 2]: is perhaps leading to a situation where, because companies are not investing, they don't feel
[Guest 2]: the need to hire more workers. And because they are not hiring more workers, they're
[Guest 2]: not producing enough output. And that is having a vicious cycle effect. And a related point
[Guest 2]: being that not enough workers have the skills required. So there is a skilling gap and there
[Guest 2]: is a so I'm guessing what I'm trying to say is there are many other factors which have
[Guest 2]: probably aggravated the current jobs crisis. And of course, it is perhaps built on the
[Guest 1]: base of a rigid labor law.
[Guest 1]: So I think I would just add one more thing. I mean, I agree with you, we've always had
[Guest 1]: bad labor laws. But what has made the effect worse and caused the glut is the demography,
[Guest 1]: right? So and that is just something, it happened by chance, right? You don't control, you can
[Guest 1]: control the regulatory system, it's much harder to control how the demographic dividend moves,
[Guest 1]: right? And countries that have tried to control it, like China are in a total mess because
[Guest 1]: of it. So one part of the glut is, we've always had terrible laws, but we never had so many
[Guest 1]: people who were young and entering the workforce. So this is a bad combination of both. It's
[Guest 1]: definitely, you know, we've had a jobs crisis for the last seven years. The economic slowdown
[Guest 1]: is only maybe post demonetization, or maybe even last 18 months, you know, not immediately
[Guest 1]: post demonetization, but I wouldn't agree, but we can debate that later. Yeah. So the
[Guest 1]: last, you know, 12 to 18 months, you could start hearing warning bells and people started
[Guest 1]: saying, you know, things are not good, something's going on. And you know, you start getting
[Guest 1]: the different warning bells from different sectors, saying, okay, the GDP numbers don't
[Guest 1]: quite add up to what's going on with cement, right? Today, the news last week is, it doesn't
[Guest 1]: quite add up with what's going on with auto sales, right, or biscuit sales. So different
[Guest 1]: sectors have sort of sent the SOS signal at different points. But we've had a demand slowdown
[Guest 1]: for a while, right? And the demand slowdown definitely has an effect, you know, when people
[Guest 1]: don't, and it's not just the slowdown, it's the expectation, right? When people form an
[Guest 1]: expectation that demand is going to slow down further, they're even more nervous to hire
[Guest 1]: employees. And that's a very large part of this contractualization that you're talking
[Guest 1]: about, right? So one part of switching from long term labor contracts to this kind of,
[Guest 1]: so you know, there are three versions of it. One is the very elite version, that is the
[Guest 1]: Amit and Vivek version, right? They want to work for themselves, they would rather work
[Guest 1]: on certain terms with different firms rather than have a single employer, and sort of clock
[Guest 1]: in. So that's a very first world sort of and that those numbers are very small. The second
[Guest 1]: group is where firms are trying to reduce the cost of labor, highly skilled labor to
[Guest 1]: avoid paying pensions and provident funds and all the other employee benefits, right?
[Guest 1]: So that you can see when there is economic distress, that's probably the first part that
[Guest 1]: gets cut, because you don't want to lose the skilled labor, which is already scarce in
[Guest 1]: India. And at the same time, there is some cost cutting that goes on. And then the third
[Guest 1]: part is this kind of contractualization caused by uncertainty. We don't know if things are
[Guest 1]: going to get worse, right? We just laid off six people, we don't know if we need to lay
[Guest 1]: off 10 more people. So let's just sort of, you know, rework because it is hard, you know,
[Guest 1]: we think of firing workers as sort of stroke of a pen thing, right? But when you're inside
[Guest 1]: working within a firm, these are real people. It's difficult to fire and burn bridges, and
[Guest 1]: then it's hard to hire them back when things are going well. So these sorts of arrangements
[Guest 1]: are a product of we really want to hold on to skilled labor, and yet, we want to deal
[Guest 1]: with the uncertainty. So I think broadly, you're right, it's not just a labor law issue.
[Guest 1]: But that really, you know, that's the scaffolding that stifles everything else, you know, nothing
[Guest 1]: can expand past that.
[Guest 3]: So I mean, talking about contract workers. So you look at a company like Maruti, and
[Guest 3]: I mean, from what I remember, half of their workers are contract workers, and half of
[Guest 3]: the workers are employees. So on the same, you know, floor, assembly floor, you might
[Guest 3]: have a situation where there are two people doing exactly the same thing. But one guy
[Guest 3]: because he's employed, might end up making probably twice or, you know, two and a half
[Guest 3]: times the guy who's on contract. So that's, and if you remember, there was a lot of violence
[Guest 3]: in the Gurgaon belt, a few years back in an HR manager was burnt by the Maruti by not
[Guest 3]: not at Maruti, this was at one of these auto ancillaries. So that's one point. The second
[Guest 3]: point about, you know, I find this term demographic dividend very, very funny. A dividend, I know,
[Guest 3]: we are assuming that there is a dividend already, it may not be a dividend, it might be a disaster
[Guest 3]: as well, which is what it is turning out to be. The third point is, I mean, demographic
[Guest 3]: dividend at a very simple level is that our parents basically produced way too many kids,
[Guest 3]: right? On 15th August, I think the Prime Minister when he made his Independence Day speech talked
[Guest 3]: about population and the need to control it. And you know, this is a huge misconception
[Guest 3]: that people have, that India's population continues to grow, which is not really true.
[Amit Varma]: This is one of my reforms. If it's not one of your reforms, stop right now. No, what
[Guest 3]: I'm trying to say is that, you know, the replacement rate is 2.1, whereas India's fertility rate,
[Guest 3]: you know, which is the average number of children a woman has is 2.3. So once you take the infant
[Guest 3]: mortality rate in India's case, which is anyway very high into account, so we are more or
[Guest 3]: less at the replacement rate. And many states in India, I mean, if you look at states like
[Guest 3]: Kerala, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, are now not producing, you know, kids at the replacement
[Guest 3]: rate. So their population over a period of time will start to contract. Now, it's states
[Guest 3]: like Bihar, UP, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, you know, the original Bimaru states, where
[Guest 3]: the rates continue to be high. Now, as the medical facilities improve, and as more women
[Guest 3]: get educated, I mean, this is bound to come down.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to your first reform.
[Guest 3]: Okay, so I just wanted to sort of, before I get into the reform, I wanted to sort of
[Guest 3]: make a long, long disclaimer. So you know, what happens is when you and I, I mean, you
[Guest 3]: know, given that we are so active on the social media, one of the things that sort of gets
[Guest 3]: thrown off thrown at us all the time is, you know, problem, problem, solution. Now, the
[Guest 3]: first thing is, you know, how do you come up with a solution without identifying the
[Guest 3]: problem? I mean, that's as basic as it gets. But having said that, you know, this entire
[Guest 3]: Indian tendency to sort of, you know, solution, but I think comes from the fact that when
[Guest 3]: we, you know, write our exams, when we grow up, a lot of the, in fact, most of the questions
[Guest 3]: have a right answer or a wrong answer. Okay. And that's primarily because of our focus
[Guest 3]: on science and maths and so on. And we look down upon subjects like history and geography
[Guest 3]: where. So, you know, so because of that, what happens is, this solution thing is very, very
[Guest 3]: strong, and which is what we're doing here today. Now, one of the things that I realized
[Guest 3]: while writing my, you know, book, last book, India's Big Government was that over the years,
[Guest 3]: the government of India has constituted lots of committees on lots of issues. And all those
[Guest 3]: committees have come up with recommendations and solutions. Or another, you know, that
[Guest 3]: you have so many economists and experts working for the government. They also write regularly
[Guest 3]: in publications, I mean, which the government sort of brings out. Now, what has happened
[Guest 3]: is that, you know, if you to give you a very, very simple example, now look at the banking
[Guest 3]: crisis currently, if you were to sort of go back to 1991, there was a Narasimhan committee,
[Guest 3]: the first Narasimhan committee, as they call it, I mean, all the solutions are there in
[Guest 3]: that report. And if you look at, you know, various social and economic problems that
[Guest 3]: we've had, and, and the committees that were constituted to tackle them, those reports
[Guest 3]: have all those solutions already. Okay, so it's not like the government does not know
[Guest 3]: what is to be done. All they need to do is if you have a problem, just pick out the last
[Guest 3]: report and go ahead and implement it. But obviously, you know, these solutions have
[Guest 3]: not been implemented. I mean, even when a committee's solutions, recommendations are
[Guest 3]: taken on, they're diluted to a large extent, and then they are pushed through. So the long
[Guest 3]: and the short of it is that the government knows what is to be done. And this is not
[Guest 3]: just the current government, or the central government, I mean, includes the state governments,
[Guest 3]: the governments at the municipal level, but they don't do it.
[Amit Varma]: I think if all governments are dissolved in water, you'll have a very interesting solution.
[Guest 3]: Bad joke. So my point is, you know, it's, it's like, so I mean, since you were talking
[Guest 3]: about the fact that, you know, to give references, so before I sort of, you know, early, you
[Guest 3]: know, even though I'm an atheist, I like listening to bhajans, particularly by this gentleman
[Guest 3]: called Hari Omsharan, because I sort of grew up, I mean, if you grew up anywhere in North
[Guest 3]: or East India, you know, his voice was very, very, sort of, you know, I mean, you used
[Guest 3]: to listen to it every morning, because that is all the temples would play. I mean, this
[Guest 3]: is before, no, so this is before Gulshan Kumar and T-Series took over the game, and the bhajans
[Guest 3]: basically became film tunes. So, yeah.
[Guest 3]: And the film tunes also became jagrata tunes.
[Guest 3]: Yeah, I mean, yeah, both of them. So, so, so basically, so this, this, the line from
[Guest 3]: this bhajan is ki, man maila aur tan ko dhoye. So, the economic, you know, inference here
[Guest 3]: is that, you know, you keep tackling the symptom without looking at the problem. So, in the
[Guest 3]: current situation,
[Amit Varma]: Or it could also mean, man maila aur tan ko dhoye, could also mean that you're really
[Amit Varma]: a perv, but you're virtue signalling on Twitter.
[Guest 3]: I don't know what that means. So, so, virtue signalling is like, I mean,
[Guest 3]: So, look at the current situation, you know, you talk to a corporate, you talk to an economist,
[Guest 3]: and everyone's like, interest rates should be cut, interest rates should be cut. I mean,
[Guest 3]: what will happen, you know, if the home loan is not at, you know, let's say, 8%, and it's
[Guest 3]: at seven and a half? I mean, how will that help in any way? So, this is like, you know,
[Guest 3]: you're just looking at the symptom that people are probably not borrowing. So, just cut interest
[Guest 3]: rates. But you are not looking at why is it that people are not borrowing. So, anyway,
[Guest 3]: so that was the long disclaimer, ki kuch hona nahi hai, but still, since we are here, we
[Guest 3]: need to do our jobs properly. So, the first thing I sort of wanted to talk about is, and
[Guest 3]: this is something a little, it's not really an, you know, I wouldn't call it an economic
[Guest 3]: reform, but it's more of a reform in education. Now, what has happened over the years, over
[Guest 3]: the last 70 years is that even, you know, the government has essentially paid a lot
[Guest 3]: of attention on higher education. But the long and the short of it is that our primary
[Guest 3]: education system is basically pretty much screwed up. And it's been screwed up even
[Guest 3]: more after the right to education was put in place, which we have discussed in an episode.
[Guest 3]: We have, yeah. So, one of the key clauses in right to education, I mean, if you read
[Guest 3]: the Bear Act, is that the teacher has to complete the syllabus. Okay. Now, because of this,
[Guest 3]: what happens is that, you know, students who come to school at a young age and come from
[Guest 3]: a very reading deficient background tend to lose out because the teacher is essentially
[Guest 3]: interested in completing the syllabus. And because of that, he ends up, he or she ends
[Guest 3]: up concentrating only on the best students in the class who are picking up stuff. That's
[Guest 3]: the first part of the problem. The second part of the problem is that there are no exams
[Guest 3]: till class eight. So, irrespective of whether you are learning or not, you keep getting
[Guest 3]: promoted and you reach class eight. Now, what has happened is in 2018 and 2019, you know,
[Guest 3]: the first batch of RTE students who started in, you know, lower KG or preparatory or whatever
[Guest 3]: you call it, in 2010, have now reached a stage where they have to write exams and they have
[Guest 3]: never written exams in their life. So, this is the new crisis which is brewing and the
[Guest 3]: parents don't know, even those who sort of, you know, belong to the well-off categories
[Guest 3]: as to what to do with this. I mean, if a student has never written exams. So, my thing is that
[Guest 3]: this is a problem that needs to be tackled seriously. And it's not about throwing more
[Guest 3]: money at, you know, as a lot of people keep saying, and that includes me, that the government
[Guest 3]: doesn't spend enough money on education. But you have to look at the situation a little
[Guest 3]: more creatively. So, one solution, because, you know, which is what we all love, is something
[Guest 3]: that, you know, Abhijit Banerjee, who's a famous economist at MIT, he shared with me
[Guest 3]: many years back, and he talked about how they had carried out a small experiment in Bihar,
[Guest 3]: in schools in Bihar, where they had hired teachers who were given contract teachers
[Guest 3]: who were trained for two weeks. And then these guys went and taught in all these schools.
[Guest 3]: And they had a very clear motive, as in, they didn't have to complete the syllabus, what
[Guest 3]: they had to do is they had to ensure that if a student couldn't read, he had to be taught
[Guest 3]: to read. If he couldn't write, he had to be taught to write. And if he couldn't do basic
[Guest 3]: maths, plus minus, he had to be taught that. And when they sort of went back and, you know,
[Guest 3]: you do a study, and you have a control group, and you know, you do all that. And when they
[Guest 3]: sort of measured it, they found that the method, at least in the experiment, really helped.
[Guest 3]: So you have to look at the entire problem from a very, very lateral point of view.
[Guest 1]: So,
[Guest 1]: I would just add a couple more things to Vivek. He's absolutely right. The RT is a total mess.
[Guest 1]: It has a schedule at the back. Okay. And one of the things that the act says is, you know,
[Guest 1]: every school must have this list of things. And if you look at those things, all of them
[Guest 1]: are inputs. You know, so clearly these people, so Alex Tabarrok, and I have written some
[Guest 1]: work on what Lantridge calls isomorphic mimicry, right? So this is basically you go to Denmark
[Guest 1]: or something, you know, you go to the United States, you look around and you're like, what
[Guest 1]: does a good school look like? Oh, a good school has large, airy classrooms, chalo, large,
[Guest 1]: airy classrooms, right? So a good school has such and such teacher to pupil ratio, right?
[Guest 1]: A good school has bathroom facilities, a good school has a separate kitchen area, a good
[Guest 1]: school has a playground, which is at least 40 meters by 20 meters. So they make a note
[Guest 1]: of all this, right? So when the government asked them, and this is where I disagree a
[Guest 1]: little bit with Vivek, I think there is some knowledge crisis also in the government. They,
[Guest 1]: the things they know are not the right things to know, right? So they're like, we know what
[Guest 1]: a good school looks like. This is what a good school looks like. And if you fundamentally
[Guest 1]: think education should be mandated top down, then it's easier to mandate inputs than outcomes,
[Guest 1]: right? Because outcomes mean you'll have to be tested. And then so it is not a coincidence
[Guest 1]: that these kids are not tested until eighth standard, right? We like to think they just
[Guest 1]: kind of forgot and said no child left behind. No child left behind is also an American and
[Guest 1]: foreign import.
[Guest 1]: There are exams there. It's not like there are no exams.
[Guest 1]: There are exams. So the fact that there are, it's completely devoid of any outcomes, you
[Guest 1]: know, you see that schedule, there's not one single outcome, right? Now, all these economists,
[Guest 1]: including some of these, you know, very fine, eminent MIT economists, and so on.
[Guest 3]: She doesn't like Banerjee and Duflo, which is what she's saying.
[Guest 1]: No, that's not true. I actually very, they've written a lovely book called Poor Economics.
[Guest 1]: I strongly recommend it. But one of the things that has come out of the, of the halls of
[Guest 1]: MIT is this randomized control trial business, right? So these people now come and measure
[Guest 1]: and what is measurable is inputs, right?
[Guest 1]: So as Vivek pointed out, one of the things is the teacher needs to complete the syllabus.
[Guest 1]: Another thing is that the teacher is a union employee, right? They get paid a lot of money,
[Guest 1]: whether they show up or not. So what all these people found was all these schools are there,
[Guest 1]: they have the correct size window, they have a bathroom, they have a kitchen, they have
[Guest 1]: a playground, but the teachers don't show up.
[Guest 1]: So all there are like RCTs, one after the other, which are trying to figure out how
[Guest 1]: to reduce teacher absenteeism, right? And we've kind of forgotten the point. The point
[Guest 1]: of the schooling was not that the teacher shows up, it was that the students learn.
[Guest 1]: We assume that the teacher showing up is instrumental to the student learning, right? But that was
[Guest 1]: not our end goal. So these people have really confused what the end goal is. They think
[Guest 1]: end goal is delivery of inputs by the state. The end goal is actually that students need
[Guest 1]: to know how to write their name by the time they're in second standard, and they need
[Guest 1]: to know how to do arithmetic by fifth standard, and they need to be able to take an exam.
[Guest 1]: So I think there is much more wrong with the RT and Vivek was actually being very, very
[Guest 1]: generous and kind to the education bureaucrats.
[Guest 2]: So I would completely agree with Shruti. First of all, I really like the point about isomorphic
[Guest 2]: mimicry because I think that applies not just in education, but in many other areas of so-called
[Guest 2]: public sector reforms that we just see somewhere, something very nice and shiny. And we think
[Guest 2]: if we transplant that to India, it will work like a miracle. And we do exactly that. And
[Guest 2]: we don't really, that's a hollow structure and we don't do anything inside. And I think
[Guest 2]: this input and outcome thing that Shruti mentioned, I would just put a little bit more structure
[Guest 2]: to it. So the way I look at it, it is basically input, output, outcome. So there are some
[Guest 2]: inputs that you're putting in to reform any particular sector of the economy or the state,
[Guest 2]: then you need to measure what is the output. Let's say in this particular example, how
[Guest 2]: many students are graduating in a particular class, or how many boys versus girls. So these
[Guest 2]: are the tangible outputs that you can measure. And it is very important for any reform to
[Guest 2]: have this tangible output measure, not just looking at the input. And the final thing,
[Guest 2]: which is very important is the outcome, that not only are you graduating a certain number
[Guest 2]: of boys and girls, but what is it they're really learning. The learning is the outcome
[Guest 2]: and the output is the students going from one class to the other or leaving the school
[Guest 2]: or more students coming in. And the input would be the infrastructure, the teachers.
[Guest 2]: Unless we design all our reforms in this kind of a structure, we'll just keep doing that
[Guest 2]: isomorphic mimicry and we'll keep building the inputs, but then there'll be absolutely
[Guest 2]: no evaluation of the output and the outcome, which is I think what ends up happening. And
[Guest 2]: I have one more point to what Vivek's disclaimer was. I think it's absolutely fine to have
[Guest 2]: committees and committee reports. And that's the way a lot of governments function. And
[Guest 2]: I think the problem that happens in the implementation of the committee recommendations is a vast
[Guest 2]: black box called political economy. I mean, economists will recommend whatever we want
[Guest 2]: to recommend. And like in the banking example that you gave, right? I mean, when 70% of
[Guest 2]: the banking sector is owned by the government, and the banks are regulated, it's not true
[Guest 3]: anymore. It is. No, it's not. It is. No, it's not. As of March 2019, 63% of loans in India
[Guest 3]: were given by public sector banks, and they had only 58% of the deposits. So even if I
[Guest 3]: take 60%, the majority of the banking sector is still owned by the government. But that
[Guest 3]: is changing. And in the next five years, you will have public sector banks. But till now,
[Guest 2]: all the problems that have happened in the banking sector, look at the NPA, 90% of the
[Guest 2]: NPAs are in the public sector banks, not in the private banks, right? And if these banks
[Guest 2]: are owned by the government, and they're regulated by an agent of the government, it's like the
[Guest 2]: agent is regulating the principle, it's never going to work no matter what committees are
[Guest 2]: recommending. So I think committee recommendation is somewhere and the political economy of
[Guest 3]: the state is somewhere else.
[Guest 3]: So it's like, you know, we talk about what are the structural factors, you know, this
[Guest 3]: is the new, you know, not a new jargon, but it's sort of come back.
[Amit Varma]: It's new for you, you're learning. It's not new for me. There's something called a structural
[Unknown]: slowdown.
[Unknown]: We're recording this, by the way, on August 23rd.
[Guest 3]: It is not a cyclical slowdown.
[Guest 3]: I have to write a column on this for Dainik Jagran after I'm out of here. So whether it's
[Guest 3]: a cyclical slowdown or a structural slowdown.
[Guest 2]: What's the Hindi of structural slowdown?
[Amit Varma]: That I'll figure out.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, these are digressions.
[Guest 3]: Google Translate. No, so what I was saying was, so the biggest structural problem are
[Guest 3]: basically the politicians.
[Guest 3]: So and what do you do about them?
[Guest 3]: So which is where all these committee reports get confined to the dustbins of history and
[Guest 3]: you know, then people like me dig it out to sort of read and make a living.
[Guest 1]: You know, I agree with you, but I also disagree with you a little bit.
[Guest 1]: We have this whole input, output, outcome business only in government, right?
[Guest 1]: So if government is in the business of making bread, like it used to own Modern Bakery,
[Guest 1]: not that long ago.
[Guest 1]: In my living memory, it used to own Modern Bakery.
[Guest 3]: Yeah, we've all grown up eating modern bread.
[Guest 1]: It's disgusting.
[Guest 1]: It's like one step above cardboard, right?
[Guest 1]: So there is the input that goes into making bread.
[Guest 1]: Then there is the output, how many slices of bread or how many kilos or how many loaves
[Guest 1]: of bread, so on and so forth.
[Guest 1]: And then there's the outcome, which is vomit, okay?
[Guest 1]: So that's how we evaluate government made bread.
[Guest 1]: How do we evaluate just bread, right?
[Guest 1]: We go to the market, we pick the bread we like, right?
[Guest 1]: You vote with your money.
[Guest 1]: The more number of people think this is good quality bread at a particular price.
[Guest 1]: So now when you're in the business of government controlling education, then we have to slice
[Guest 1]: and dice and then that system can be gamed, right?
[Guest 1]: Then we can make the outcome how many kids are graduating.
[Guest 2]: So then the problem goes even more fundamental.
[Guest 2]: Exactly.
[Guest 1]: Is it the government's business to be in education?
[Amit Varma]: Which is one of my reforms.
[Amit Varma]: No, actually, that's not the appropriate question.
[Guest 1]: I think the appropriate question is, is it the government's business to be in education
[Guest 1]: to the exclusion of everyone else?
[Amit Varma]: Okay, may I butt in here?
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: The government wants to eliminate competition.
[Amit Varma]: I'll butt in here because this is one of my reforms and therefore I will ask you to wait
[Amit Varma]: a little bit and we will change the order and I will get this reform over with.
[Amit Varma]: So my reform basically is that we allow schools for profit.
[Amit Varma]: Now I want to set a little bit of context here.
[Amit Varma]: What really happened in the 50s and 60s was that we had a mindset that private enterprise
[Amit Varma]: was bad.
[Amit Varma]: Jawaharlal Nehru famously said to JRD Tata, do not speak to me of profit.
[Amit Varma]: Profit is a dirty word, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And as a result of that, there was a sense that there are some sectors of the economy
[Amit Varma]: which are too important to leave to the private sector.
[Amit Varma]: The government has to do them.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them, of course, was education.
[Amit Varma]: And there were a lot of sectors which were part of this.
[Amit Varma]: And what really happened with liberalization is that some of the sectors in which the government
[Amit Varma]: was controlling and there wasn't much private participation, were basically opened up.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if you remember, back in the 80s, you know, you could only fly Air India
[Amit Varma]: or Indian Airlines, they were prohibitively expensive.
[Amit Varma]: If you wanted a telephone, you had a five year waiting list, all of that, telecom got
[Amit Varma]: opened up, airlines got opened up.
[Amit Varma]: And instantly, you know, we can see the difference all around us.
[Amit Varma]: Today, a phone is accessible to anyone.
[Amit Varma]: And far more people can afford to fly than was the case earlier.
[Amit Varma]: The problem with education is that we haven't allowed schools for profit.
[Amit Varma]: And what that does with not necessarily debarring them, but with a host of regulations like
[Amit Varma]: your playground has to be this size and blah, blah, blah, and it just becomes almost impossible
[Amit Varma]: to run a school for profit.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of private schools that exist do jugars with trusts and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And the result of that is that the amount of choice that is available for parents goes
[Amit Varma]: down massively.
[Amit Varma]: And what you see across the country is people have this impression that private schools
[Amit Varma]: are just very expensive.
[Amit Varma]: And they're only for the elites.
[Amit Varma]: That's not at all true.
[Amit Varma]: What you see across the country is you have budget private schools opening up in slums.
[Amit Varma]: James Tully has written a book on this, I forget the name, and there have been studies
[Amit Varma]: by the Center for Civil Society.
[Amit Varma]: And we know from Delhi, Hyderabad, Chennai, that you have situations where schools open
[Amit Varma]: up impromptu in the slums, and like, poor parents like domestic help and auto rickshaw
[Amit Varma]: drivers and so on, prefer to pay 100 bucks or 200 bucks a month to send their kid to
[Amit Varma]: that school rather than to a free government school.
[Amit Varma]: Now, they're basically voting with their feet, which is as it should be, and which is how
[Amit Varma]: people choose bread, for example, by voting with their wallets.
[Amit Varma]: And I am often mischaracterized for saying that the government should get out of education,
[Amit Varma]: what will happen there, which is not my case at all.
[Amit Varma]: My case is simply that the government should do the same thing in education, which it did
[Amit Varma]: in airlines and telecom, you allow private players to participate without any conditions.
[Amit Varma]: Nobody wants to open a budget private school in a slum in a room only with no playground,
[Amit Varma]: allow them to do so, don't harass them, let the market vote with their feet, see what
[Amit Varma]: happens and get rid of this mentality that profit is a dirty word because the only way
[Amit Varma]: anyone can profit is by fulfilling somebody else's need.
[Amit Varma]: That is the only way to profit.
[Amit Varma]: Profit is therefore the greatest form of philanthropy.
[Amit Varma]: And I think this is like a fundamental mind shift that needs to happen, especially in
[Amit Varma]: education, where to add a point and to connect it to the jobs crisis.
[Amit Varma]: There is a massive mismatch today between the kind of workers coming out into the field
[Amit Varma]: and the kind of skills that are needed.
[Amit Varma]: People do PhDs and MPhils and they simply have no employable skills.
[Amit Varma]: And where does such a demand supply mismatch happen, where there is no market at play?
[Amit Varma]: Allow the freaking market.
[Guest 1]: I would add one more thing.
[Guest 1]: I think there is no greater damning evidence that a system has completely failed when parents
[Guest 1]: from really poor families would spend close to half their income and spend four thousand
[Guest 1]: or five thousand rupees to send their children to a for-profit tiny school where you're sort
[Guest 1]: of, you know, stacked like sardines rather than go to the government school, which is
[Guest 1]: for free and which is nearby.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: And one very large part of not allowing for-profit schools is the optics will be terrible because
[Guest 1]: right now they can show the nice building with the airy windows and no teachers and
[Guest 1]: no students and then compare it to these terribly crowded, you know, they actually look quite
[Guest 1]: bad.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: I went to maths tuition in 10th standard or 11th standard in one of these rooms where
[Guest 1]: it was like a capacity for 30 people and 90 people were stacked.
[Guest 1]: But the quality of the maths being taught to us was fantastic.
[Guest 1]: It doesn't look good.
[Guest 1]: So they produce these documents in court and say, look at these people commercializing.
[Guest 1]: These children don't have room to breathe.
[Guest 1]: There is no window in the room.
[Guest 1]: They don't get bathroom breaks.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: So if you really genuinely allowed for-profit schools, those schools would be able to invest.
[Guest 1]: See, right now, the schools are under tremendous uncertainty.
[Guest 1]: You know, in Sangam Vihar in Delhi, they shut down like five, six hundred schools like this
[Guest 1]: every year.
[Guest 1]: They have this little raid, they take their, you know, billboards down and then one year
[Guest 2]: later they back up.
[Guest 2]: So I have a question here.
[Guest 2]: Is that other than the government causing obstacles like this, right, like going to
[Guest 2]: the court and taking them down, etc.
[Guest 2]: Legally speaking or from a regulatory perspective or institution wise, is there any bottleneck
[Guest 2]: or obstacle for the private sector to set up primary education?
[Guest 1]: So the licensing requirement.
[Guest 1]: So first of all, this is state and municipal, right?
[Guest 1]: The licensing requirements to set up any school is just incredibly high.
[Guest 1]: So even the best, you know, posh convent schools are breaking half a dozen rules at any given
[Guest 1]: point in time, because to open a new school, I think the number that I last read was 34
[Guest 1]: or 44.
[Guest 1]: Like, you just need a ridiculous number of licenses.
[Guest 1]: That's one kind of bottleneck.
[Guest 1]: The other kind of bottleneck is, you know, a school is supposed to be a structure that
[Guest 1]: lasts for a really long time, right, which means when you go to these old countries,
[Guest 1]: you know, these European countries and you see the school was set up in 1500 or 1400,
[Guest 1]: they set it up as if it was supposed to exist forever.
[Guest 1]: Now if you're constantly under regulatory threat that someone's going to come and shut
[Guest 1]: down your shutter, you're not going to invest in windows, right?
[Guest 1]: You invest in the bare bones, which is benches, markers, the teacher and the students showing
[Guest 1]: up and that's it.
[Guest 1]: You don't invest in anything else.
[Guest 1]: So private schools also look terrible.
[Guest 1]: Even the budget private schools look terrible, even though there's so much money in education
[Guest 1]: and people would like to invest, because it's so difficult to invest in education and get
[Guest 2]: a return on it.
[Guest 2]: So essentially this reform, what I'm trying to understand is what are the tangible things
[Guest 2]: required to make this reform work.
[Amit Varma]: And this would be amending a lot of laws and require regulatory licensing requirements.
[Amit Varma]: I've actually had a great episode on this with Amit Chandra, who actually works in this
[Amit Varma]: specific field.
[Amit Varma]: It's an over one hour episode.
[Amit Varma]: That's really good.
[Amit Varma]: I recommend listeners check that out.
[Amit Varma]: And also, I would just add that the larger point here is of agency and choice.
[Amit Varma]: Parents are in the best position to make a decision about where the kids should go to
[Amit Varma]: school.
[Amit Varma]: You are robbing them of choice.
[Amit Varma]: No one is saying shut down the government schools, keep them going, but you're robbing
[Amit Varma]: them of choice by not allowing private providers.
[Amit Varma]: Imagine if the same thing happened to bread, there would be so much outrage.
[Amit Varma]: It happens in education, which is so much more important than bread and there is no
[Amit Varma]: outrage and Vivek.
[Guest 3]: Couple of points.
[Guest 3]: So one is that, you know, because of all this, you know, we have an employment crisis.
[Guest 3]: We also have an employability crisis.
[Guest 3]: So even when companies put out, you know, posts for jobs, they don't get the right candidates.
[Guest 3]: The second point I would like to make, and you know, this is education for profit.
[Guest 3]: I mean, look at the fact that a lot of private equity money is now going into tutorials.
[Guest 3]: I mean, if education for profit was allowed, and I mean, tutorial is nothing just, you
[Guest 3]: know, you're beating the system by you're starting a school, but you call it a tutorial.
[Amit Varma]: You're filling a gap in the system.
[Guest 3]: The question is, why is that gap there?
[Guest 3]: So the gaps there and someone's filling in that gap and he's getting private equity money.
[Guest 3]: Now that private equity money could easily go to an a real education entrepreneur who's
[Guest 3]: setting up real schools and so on and so forth.
[Guest 3]: So I mean, why should all the private equity money go to Swiggy and you know,
[Amit Varma]: I think we're spending so much time per reform that we, you know, maybe we should leave jobs
[Amit Varma]: and education behind us.
[Guest 2]: Thank you so much.
[Guest 2]: So actually, yeah, I will not talk about jobs and education, but I'll talk about something
[Guest 2]: that is related to government spending.
[Guest 2]: So taking the cues from what Amit said about, you know, government should let the private
[Guest 2]: sector come in and all of that.
[Guest 2]: So my reform is basically about fiscal discipline, which I think is an extremely important thing
[Guest 2]: for the government to follow.
[Guest 2]: So whenever a government spends money, there are, let's say, three ways for the government
[Guest 2]: to finance that expenditure.
[Guest 2]: You can either tax the current generation, which is in a way the most fair way to do
[Guest 2]: because the current generation is also benefiting from the goodies that the government is giving.
[Guest 2]: Or you tax the future generation, which is unfair because the future generation is not
[Guest 2]: benefiting from the government spending.
[Guest 2]: The second way would be to borrow.
[Guest 2]: And at some point, you will have to repay what you have borrowed.
[Guest 2]: And the third is to basically print money and inflate your way out of it, which is a
[Guest 2]: big burden on the poor.
[Guest 2]: So either which way, whenever the government ends up spending, the burden falls on the
[Guest 2]: taxpayer either today or tomorrow, one way or the other.
[Guest 2]: And what the government typically ends up doing is, and this is not just the Indian
[Guest 2]: government, this is governments in general have a temptation to spend 100 rupees today
[Guest 2]: and tax only 90 rupees.
[Guest 2]: This makes us feel very good because we are getting goodies worth of rupees 100, but we
[Guest 2]: are only bearing the burden of 90.
[Guest 2]: But what ends up happening is that 10 rupees gets pushed out to the next generation.
[Guest 2]: So we make our children pay more for what we are enjoying today.
[Guest 2]: And this is basically the classic way that what is called fiscal deficit, right, keeps
[Guest 2]: on increasing and increasing.
[Guest 2]: And that keeps on adding to the debt burden of the government.
[Guest 2]: And that's a very serious problem.
[Guest 2]: Because if governments give in to this temptation of spending and pushing the taxing in the
[Guest 2]: future generation, then this can go on forever.
[Guest 2]: And generation after generation keeps paying for this.
[Guest 2]: And we have recently seen in Europe, for example, what happens when there is a sovereign debt
[Guest 2]: crisis when governments default on their debt and so on so forth.
[Guest 2]: Now coming to India, there is now given that we have Aadhaar and we have Jan Dhan accounts
[Guest 2]: and whatnot, there is not only a temptation for the government to spend, but there is
[Guest 2]: also a very easy way for the government to spend because all you have to do is essentially
[Guest 2]: just keep giving your transfers and direct benefits or what have you made to these bank
[Guest 2]: accounts.
[Guest 2]: And what we have also seen is that the government has practically no interest to listen to whatever
[Guest 2]: our Fiscal Responsibility Budget Management Act, a long thing, FRBM Act stipulated because
[Guest 2]: that has become a farce and there is no real consequence for the government to violate
[Guest 2]: it.
[Guest 2]: And every year when the budget is presented, we spend a lot of time writing and discussing
[Guest 2]: what is the actual fiscal deficit, what has been pushed out of the budget, so on so forth.
[Guest 2]: So fiscal discipline, I think, is a big crisis in India and has been so for a while.
[Guest 2]: So one reform that I can think of is, and it's a bit of a draconian thing, but I think
[Guest 2]: that's what is needed, is something what Germany did.
[Guest 2]: In the peak of the 2008 financial crisis, when the temptation of the government to give
[Guest 2]: a fiscal stimulus was very high, and when Germany was in the acute shock of the financial
[Guest 2]: crisis, the German debt to GDP had reached 80 percent and they were only supposed to
[Guest 2]: be at 60 percent according to the Maastricht Treaty.
[Guest 2]: So what the German constitution, what the German government did, which I think is remarkable,
[Guest 2]: they were decent enough to say that at the time when the temptation of the government
[Guest 2]: to run a high fiscal deficit is so big, we are going to tie the hands of the government.
[Guest 2]: And so they enshrined in the German constitutional law something called a debt break, which stipulated
[Guest 2]: that by 2016, the overall structural deficit of the government will be at a tight maximum
[Guest 2]: of 0.35 percent of GDP.
[Guest 2]: Now, imagine you're starting at a point where the debt to GDP ratio is 83 percent.
[Guest 2]: And technically, you're saying that in the next four or five years, you bring down the
[Guest 2]: structural deficit to 0.35 percent of GDP, which means your debt gradually goes down
[Guest 2]: to 60 percent from 83 percent at a time when Germany is in the throes of the financial
[Guest 2]: crisis.
[Guest 2]: And all the states of Germany will bring down the deficit to zero by 2020.
[Guest 2]: So this was a really, really tight fiscal discipline rule where Germany imposed a balanced
[Guest 2]: budget on itself.
[Guest 2]: And the consequence of that was that over the next seven years, from 2012 to now, Germany
[Guest 2]: has run a budget surplus in each of the years.
[Guest 2]: And last year, the German budget surplus was as high as 1.7 percent of GDP.
[Guest 2]: And now the debt to GDP is actually at 60 percent, it's projected to be 50 percent.
[Guest 2]: So it's a remarkable thing that they have done, and it's not that the German government
[Guest 2]: is not spending.
[Guest 2]: What they have done is you are essentially financing your expenses just from your revenue
[Guest 2]: and you're shrinking your public debt, which is exactly what John Maynard Keynes would
[Guest 2]: recommend, which is exactly what any fiscal sound principle would recommend, that you
[Guest 2]: spend during bad times and you save during good times.
[Guest 2]: And basically, if you save during good times, what it does is when the next bad time comes,
[Guest 2]: you have the credibility and the space to borrow.
[Guest 2]: Otherwise, if you keep borrowing and spending, you are just in that perpetual fiscal deficit
[Guest 2]: mode where there is no credibility and nobody will want to lend you money if there is a
[Guest 2]: war, if there is a deep recession.
[Guest 2]: The only exception the German debt break constitutional amendment has is natural disasters and deep
[Guest 2]: recession.
[Guest 2]: Other than that, you have to stick to this rule.
[Guest 2]: And I think that is something it's high time we introduce in India.
[Guest 2]: And since constitutional amendment is not very difficult these days, we should enshrine
[Guest 2]: that in the constitution and make a meaningful change to say we are going to tie down the
[Guest 2]: hands of our government and that will force the government to prioritize its expenses.
[Guest 2]: Instead of announcing 65 different schemes, which nobody is monitoring, you prioritize
[Guest 2]: that, OK, if these are the five schemes which are important, I'm going to do this and then
[Guest 2]: gradually shrink the size of the government.
[Guest 2]: And as you said, let the private sector, let the market give them a chance and let them
[Guest 2]: work.
[Guest 2]: Otherwise, we'll end up in a situation where the government is so intrusive in our lives
[Guest 2]: that it just keeps becoming a fatter and fatter cat.
[Guest 2]: And who's financing it?
[Guest 3]: We.
[Guest 3]: So, I mean, clearly, she doesn't believe in the modern monetary theory and which is a
[Guest 3]: huge thing these days.
[Guest 3]: I mean, when the moment you talk about fiscal deficit on the social media, people will jump
[Guest 3]: on you, citing this new area of economics.
[Guest 2]: Because everyone on social media is a trained economist, especially when I usually don't
[Guest 3]: believe in things which are huge things.
[Guest 3]: And the second point, you know, in Germany's case, they were lucky to have had the hyperinflation
[Guest 3]: of 1923, because all that economic thinking goes back to that.
[Guest 3]: And then they tend to do the right things.
[Guest 3]: I mean, every other nation is not as lucky.
[Guest 3]: The third point I wanted to make is and I mean, this is something, you know, we've had
[Guest 3]: long conversations on is the fact that the fiscal deficit of the central government,
[Guest 3]: you know, when we say is 3.4 or 3.3% of the GDP, I mean, that's one big sham.
[Guest 3]: I mean, if you look at the total public sector borrowing requirement, as you know, the total
[Guest 3]: borrowing of the government is termed as it comes to clearly, you know, it comes to 8.5%,
[Guest 3]: 9% of the GDP in an era where our financial savings have come down dramatically.
[Guest 3]: So I mean, one is that, you know, fiscal deficit is not represented correctly.
[Guest 3]: And the other point, the more important point is that this is why interest rates are not
[Guest 3]: going to come down.
[Guest 3]: I mean, you can keep cutting the repo rate till kingdom come.
[Guest 3]: But the banks ultimately have to compete with the government.
[Guest 3]: So unless the government sort of cuts its expenditure, the interest rates are not going
[Guest 2]: to come down.
[Guest 2]: And one point to add to what Vivek said is, ironically enough, our government expenditure
[Guest 2]: is ballooned at a time when apparently our economy has been booming, you know, it doesn't
[Guest 2]: make any sense that if the GDP growth is showing that we are growing at 7.5, 8.2% in a quarter,
[Guest 2]: that is the time when your government expenditure fiscal deficit is not able to stick to their
[Guest 2]: FRBM target and you're going to 3.4, 3.5% of GDP.
[Guest 2]: It doesn't make any economic sense whatsoever.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, if you explain to me, fine, we are in a deep recession, you need to give some real
[Guest 2]: good stimulus to infrastructure projects to yank the economy out of it.
[Guest 2]: And you're going to cut expenses on the schemes.
[Guest 2]: That's a different thing.
[Guest 2]: But we are doing schemes, we are doing apparently some infrastructure, we are doing everything,
[Guest 2]: because the government is doing all the spending, because all the other demand sources in the
[Guest 2]: economy have gone to sleep.
[Guest 2]: So we have no investment, no exports, no consumption, nobody's buying toothpaste or biscuits or
[Guest 2]: cars.
[Guest 2]: But the government is the big giant elephant in the room who's spending, because the government
[Guest 2]: has access to some real secret source of money hidden away somewhere.
[Guest 2]: Of course, that's not true, because we are all paying for that.
[Guest 3]: You've got some really nice statues.
[Guest 3]: So which is why the next point here is that when businesses now ask for a fiscal stimulus,
[Guest 3]: the point is, if you look at data over the last two years, the fiscal stimulus is already
[Guest 3]: there in the system.
[Guest 3]: And it's a huge one, because if you look at government, just the government expenditure,
[Guest 3]: it grew by 19% in 17-18 and 13% in 18-19.
[Guest 3]: And it's the biggest growth in the last 10 years, I mean, if you leave out the part around
[Guest 3]: the financial crisis.
[Guest 2]: So it's the nature of the fiscal stimulus, Vivek.
[Guest 2]: So for example, if I give you the analogy, so in 1999-2002, we had another economic slowdown.
[Guest 2]: We had a very big economic stagnation, we had a slowdown.
[Guest 2]: And that was also the time when the government had given a fiscal stimulus.
[Guest 2]: But that stimulus was in the form of, let's say, an NHEI investment, a golden quadrilateral,
[Guest 2]: like proper infrastructure investment.
[Guest 2]: Now a fiscal stimulus takes the form of building toilets and houses and gases and I don't know
[Guest 2]: what, right.
[Guest 2]: So there is also a nature of fiscal stimulus that is needed.
[Guest 2]: But I think, yeah, the overarching thing is whatever the government does, there needs
[Guest 2]: to be a rule that ties down the hand of the government.
[Guest 2]: And a rule that has real consequences, like if you're enshrined in the Constitution, it's
[Guest 2]: a real consequence of the change that you really have to amend it again.
[Guest 2]: And all off balance sheet fine, if you're a BHAL, if an FCI, if an NHEI, too bad, you
[Guest 2]: also get clubbed into that because you have just been party to this whole thing as well.
[Guest 3]: So the, I mean, sorry to butt in again, now, NHEI, not NHEI, sorry, FCI, in 2019-20, will
[Guest 3]: end up borrowing around 1,90,000 crore from the National Small Savings Fund.
[Guest 3]: I mean, this is, we're getting into very, very dangerous territory now, because this
[Guest 3]: is, you know, the money that we invest in our public provident fund and all the post
[Guest 3]: office income schemes.
[Guest 1]: So you know, I'll tell you what I agree on.
[Guest 1]: So I completely agree with you that, you know, our fiscal discipline, I mean, we don't have
[Guest 1]: any fiscal discipline.
[Guest 1]: And there are parts of the fiscal discipline, which is depending on the kind of spending
[Guest 1]: can be better or worse, we've lost the plot there also.
[Guest 1]: There's a great book on what you were talking about the whole, you know, taxing versus debt.
[Guest 1]: So this whole nonsense of Ricardian equivalence, James Buchanan and Richard Wagner have a book
[Guest 1]: called Democracy in Deficit, which talks about the inherent problems of democratic politics,
[Guest 1]: which push it towards debt as opposed to taxation, basically, because when you're taxing people,
[Guest 1]: they also tend to be your voters.
[Guest 1]: And when you raise money through debt, those voters are either not yet voting or not yet
[Guest 1]: born.
[Guest 1]: So it is much easier to reduce taxes and increase debt, because those people are not yet voting,
[Guest 1]: right.
[Guest 1]: So we shift the problem to the next generation.
[Guest 1]: And because any government is sort of, you know, has no limit in that sense, right, so
[Guest 1]: it's going to be immortal.
[Guest 1]: You can keep sort of rolling it on to the next generation and the next generation, the
[Guest 1]: music only stops when you have these demographic problems or crises or something like that.
[Guest 1]: So it's a lovely book that I recommend for everyone.
[Guest 1]: Now, coming to Germany versus India, you know, Germany could have done this even without
[Guest 1]: the constitutional constraint, because it's Germany.
[Guest 1]: One, they have excellent legislative discipline, right, they have very good separation of powers.
[Guest 1]: They have a very tight feedback mechanism between the voters and taxpayers, who are
[Guest 1]: fairly rich individuals, like the tax base is really big, and the government, right.
[Guest 1]: So all these three things included means that people do get upset in Germany, like regular
[Guest 1]: folks get upset if you're going too much into debt, because they know what the consequences
[Guest 1]: of that are.
[Guest 1]: Now, that's not the case in India.
[Guest 1]: So the temptation in India is let's constitutionalize it.
[Guest 1]: Now I have studied all our 103 or whatever the number of constitutional amendments are.
[Guest 1]: What we like to do is to push things to the constitutional stage, but it's ridiculously
[Guest 1]: easy to amend our constitution, right, a little bit harder than passing law, passing legislation.
[Guest 1]: It's really no constraint.
[Guest 1]: We change the constitution.
[Guest 1]: I keep buying new copies of the constitution in the last 15 years, because it keeps changing.
[Amit Varma]: As the joke goes, it's a periodical, not a book.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: So this is a problem.
[Guest 1]: So now if you put this in to the constitution, like certain parts of the constitution, which
[Guest 1]: are just, you know, there's one of these provisions of reservations, which Ambedkar had initially
[Guest 1]: intended would eclipse after the first 10 years, you know, after 10 years, we won't
[Guest 1]: need reservation.
[Guest 1]: That was the world Ambedkar had imagined for India.
[Guest 1]: Every 10 years, it's extended.
[Guest 1]: It's a constitutional amendment.
[Guest 1]: It is so procedural now, they just show up.
[Guest 1]: You know what the quorum requirement, you know, how many people need to say yes, they
[Guest 1]: just amend and move on.
[Guest 1]: I have a feeling that any kind of fiscal responsibility in the constitution will just become one of
[Guest 1]: those things, while they can still feel good about the fact that they constitutionalized
[Guest 1]: it.
[Guest 1]: So in some senses, it's, I think, even more dangerous.
[Guest 1]: I think what is really important long run, right, I mean, since we're really looking
[Guest 1]: for reform and not band-aid, long run, what is really important is, one, we need to really
[Guest 1]: expand our tax base, right, our tax base is just not big enough.
[Guest 1]: So our government both spends too much and too little, depending on which area of the
[Guest 1]: economy that you're talking about.
[Guest 1]: So and the larger the tax base, the more people will be upset if you increase taxes.
[Guest 1]: So that also acts as some kind of fiscal check or fiscal constraints, because the moment
[Guest 1]: you become a taxpayer, suddenly you start worrying about government spending and, you
[Guest 1]: know, fiscal responsibility and so on.
[Guest 1]: So that's, you know, one thing.
[Guest 1]: The second goes back to our education problem, which is, you know, I mean, forget fiscal
[Guest 1]: responsibility, we can't count in class 10.
[Guest 1]: So the idea that we are going to have an electorate in 20 years from today, or even three years
[Guest 1]: from today, who actually understand these things, you know, I mean, they don't need
[Guest 1]: to understand it at the sophistication you have as an economics professor who does this
[Guest 1]: for a living.
[Guest 1]: But to just understand the basics of, oh, this is the arithmetic, right?
[Guest 1]: And the government can't defy the rules of basic arithmetic the same way we can't.
[Guest 1]: Right?
[Guest 1]: So where does this gap coming from?
[Guest 1]: That is just completely missing in these other people voting for them.
[Guest 1]: So in some sense, I mean, what, what is your fail safe when the constitutional constraint
[Guest 1]: fails?
[Guest 1]: It's the people.
[Guest 1]: Right?
[Guest 1]: So maybe that fail safe is just missing, we've broken the constitutional fail safe.
[Guest 2]: So we're screwed.
[Guest 2]: So let me just respond to Shruti very quickly.
[Guest 2]: So the first point about the fact that, yeah, of course, it's very easy politically to spend
[Guest 2]: and of course, unpopular to tax, which is the case everywhere.
[Guest 2]: But it's also and since we're talking of dream reforms here, right?
[Guest 2]: It is imperative for the government to people also vote on the basis of what kind of public
[Guest 2]: goods they have access to, whether they have a road next to their house through which they
[Guest 2]: can go to the school, whether they have a school that they can they can learn to after
[Guest 2]: the school, do they actually have a job, do they have the train connection.
[Guest 2]: So people also vote on the basis of the public goods that they have access to, and not just
[Guest 2]: on the basis of whether they are taxing more or less, right.
[Guest 2]: And so if and given a fact in a situation where there are people who are accessing the
[Guest 2]: public goods, and that's critical to them and not really the ones who are paying taxes,
[Guest 2]: right.
[Guest 2]: So if the government believes in this, that, okay, we have to basically win election on
[Guest 2]: the basis of the public goods that we are providing, and not on the basis of this fiscal
[Guest 2]: jugglery that we are doing, then it's not impossible.
[Guest 2]: And it's not required that the all the people of the country don't need to understand that
[Guest 2]: what the complicated fiscal math is.
[Guest 2]: And this is something that is strongly believe in, we are not running the government in Twitter,
[Guest 2]: we do not and should not continuously care about what all the people of the country want,
[Guest 2]: you know, I mean, all the people of the country will want something that may not be good for
[Guest 2]: the country, because they may not be aware of what is really good for the country.
[Guest 2]: And that's perfectly fine.
[Guest 2]: But if we tell them that we are giving you the services and the goods that you need,
[Guest 2]: and we are not taxing you, that is a very, it's a nice dream world to have.
[Guest 2]: And as I said, you don't literacy and education, of course, it is very important, but because
[Guest 2]: we don't have it does not mean that we will reach a situation that as and when the population
[Guest 2]: is literate, like Germany, only then we can aspire to have a debt GDP ratio, which is
[Guest 2]: 60%.
[Guest 2]: I don't think these two are should be connected.
[Guest 2]: And, and the the last point I want to make is, yes, I agree that Indian Constitution
[Guest 2]: is the most amended one in the world.
[Guest 2]: And it is very easy to amend it.
[Guest 2]: But my point is that what I the German debt break, I was using as an example, that something
[Guest 2]: which is that tight something which is that enshrined in the law of the land, because
[Guest 2]: clearly, there's some kind of a willingness because we did pass the FRBM Act.
[Guest 2]: And we do keep mentioning FRBM every year.
[Guest 2]: So there is some awareness, vague consciousness that okay, we need to be on the fiscal path.
[Guest 2]: But there is nothing which is of consequence, because in any country, it is difficult to
[Guest 2]: tie the hands of the government, because who will tie the hands of the government, the
[Guest 2]: government itself.
[Guest 2]: So it is very difficult, it is very tricky to tie the hands of the government, because
[Guest 2]: the government itself will have to do it.
[Guest 2]: Now, the reason I said constitutional amendment is because even if it is easy, but it's still
[Guest 2]: relatively harder than just violating an FRBM Act without any consequence.
[Guest 2]: But my point is to dream and think of some kind of a structure which will really tie
[Guest 2]: the hands of the government so tight, that to violate it, there will be some consequence.
[Guest 2]: Of course, you can argue that a government can do anything and there's no consequence,
[Guest 2]: of course, with that caveat.
[Guest 2]: Because otherwise, as you said, we will end up in a situation where the government will
[Guest 2]: keep conning us for generation after generation.
[Guest 2]: And we will never be able to move out of this state that the economy is in.
[Guest 1]: I would say, you know, the German example is pertinent, because you have to understand
[Guest 1]: where the causation of the constraint comes from.
[Guest 1]: It comes from the people.
[Guest 1]: It doesn't come from the constitution.
[Guest 1]: The constitution is the manifestation of what the people of Germany really care about, which
[Guest 1]: is, you know, tight fiscal discipline.
[Guest 1]: As long as in majoritarian politics, where the majority gets to amend the constitution
[Guest 1]: and do it over and over again, if the people genuinely don't care about this, and since
[Guest 1]: we're talking about the dream reform, right, like, if we genuinely don't have people who
[Guest 1]: care about fiscal discipline, you're not going to get it.
[Guest 2]: So I don't agree that people don't care about fiscal discipline, for example, people don't
[Guest 2]: think about fiscal discipline.
[Guest 2]: Every time there is a budget, there are enough people, people are writing and thinking and
[Guest 1]: discussing.
[Guest 1]: Those are not the people I'm talking about.
[Guest 2]: No, but that's what I'm saying.
[Guest 2]: I think if we keep thinking that all the people of the country will have to care about a reform
[Amit Varma]: for that reform to happen.
[Guest 1]: I think Rajeshwari's point is that elite shaped the discourse.
[Guest 1]: I know the point, but that's why we have so much of the elite signaling, we passed FRBM
[Guest 1]: because we wanted to pretend to the rest of the world, we are open for business, right?
[Guest 2]: So Oh, India, we also passed FRBM because we did realize that having a fiscally profligate
[Guest 2]: government is not good for the economy.
[Unknown]: I understand.
[Guest 1]: But I'm saying, it's the means to other ends, which is, you know, we want more private investment
[Amit Varma]: in FDI and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Part of the dream and dream reform, which she is mentioning, and I share the dream is
[Amit Varma]: that we have a constitution, which is which actually means something and as you and I
[Amit Varma]: would agree, it doesn't mean anything, it doesn't mean anything.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, the whole purpose of a constitution in the kind of republic that
[Amit Varma]: we dream of is a constitution that is a restraint on government and which ties the hands of
[Amit Varma]: government as she correctly said.
[Guest 1]: It hasn't tied the hands of government.
[Unknown]: At all.
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Unknown]: But what is happening in Kashmir?
[Unknown]: Since we are dreaming.
[Unknown]: We passed a constitutional amendment by voice vote with the president signing this deal.
[Amit Varma]: If you're going to talk about reforms, which are feasible in the current setup of the government,
[Guest 2]: then there is nothing called a dream reform.
[Guest 3]: So because we are dreaming, let's let's have Vivek take the middle path.
[Guest 3]: So see, one of the biggest problems in reforms in India, I mean, has been the fact that it's
[Guest 3]: always been reformed by stealth.
[Guest 3]: No politician has ever bothered to sit and explain to the electorate, you know, this
[Guest 3]: is why we're doing this.
[Guest 3]: This is why let's say we introduce a tax.
[Guest 3]: So this is the reason we are introducing this tax or anything for that matter.
[Guest 3]: I mean, let's say the government decides to shut down Air India.
[Guest 3]: Okay.
[Guest 3]: So somebody is going to explain it to the people never happens.
[Guest 3]: The only time I've seen, you know, a little bit of it happening was when Narendra Modi
[Guest 3]: tried to push in the Land Acquisition Act.
[Guest 3]: He did one episode on Man Ki Baat.
[Guest 3]: Uske baad, what happened was, you know, Rahul Gandhi made that sootboot ki sarkar jaib and
[Guest 3]: we were done.
[Guest 3]: We went back to where we were.
[Guest 3]: So unless politicians take a lead here and start explaining things to people, and which
[Guest 3]: is very easy these days, you know, I mean, look at the kind of all, you know, fake news,
[Guest 3]: which keeps going around in the, you know, on the social media.
[Guest 3]: I mean, there are multiple ways of reaching people these days, which are not there.
[Guest 1]: So it has to start from the top.
[Guest 1]: I mean, otherwise, it's not.
[Guest 1]: I have one of my reforms caters to this point, but from the bottom, we'll come to it a little
[Amit Varma]: later.
[Amit Varma]: But I would add there that we can't rely on politicians, but we can rely on incentives,
[Amit Varma]: which gives me the slightly dismal hope that it is only a massive crisis, which absolutely
[Amit Varma]: forces change, which will help us in any way.
[Guest 3]: Yes, but see, again, you know, the point there is that, you know, if the economy keeps getting
[Amit Varma]: reformed, only when there is a crisis, exactly, I agree with you, we'll never reach anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, no, we have to stop this doom and gloom.
[Amit Varma]: We need to take a break and come back sunshiny and cheerful.
[Amit Varma]: Quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: We'll see you on the other side with six more reforms.
[Amit Varma]: We've only done three now.
[Unknown]: Can you imagine how much insight awaits you?
[Unknown]: So, we are
[Unknown]: This week, IVM Podcast's co-founder Kavita Rajwade and Karthik Nagarajan take you through
[Unknown]: the journey of the Filter Coffee Podcast.
[Unknown]: They share their favourite memories from renowned guests and talk about what to look forward
[Unknown]: to in the show's future.
[Unknown]: On Marble's Lost and Found, Zain and Avanti host an AMA special where they answer listener
[Unknown]: questions.
[Unknown]: On Mr. and Mrs. Binge Watch, Janice and Anirudh continue their Emmy special series.
[Unknown]: Tune in to know their picks from the comedy category.
[Unknown]: On Waterplayer, Mikhail, Akash and Siddharth are discussing The Ashes, the Afghanistan-Bangladesh
[Unknown]: match and a lot more.
[Unknown]: On Bhartalap, it's a crossover episode.
[Unknown]: Hosts Akash and Naveen are joined by Anupam Gupta, host of Paisa Vaisa.
[Unknown]: Tune in to discover a different side of Anupam on this podcast.
[Unknown]: On Agla Station Adulthood, Ayushi and Ritasha discuss how to navigate through relationships
[Unknown]: as adults.
[Unknown]: On Poliyabazi, host Pranay talks to Samrat, a writer and journalist, about the causes
[Unknown]: and dynamics of the tensions in Northeast India.
[Unknown]: On Kinetic Living, coach Urmi shares a workout called X-Cross MC on Tabata Tuesdays and also
[Unknown]: highlights the importance of resting between workout routines on Thriving Thursdays.
[Unknown]: On Geekfruit, hosts Tejas and Dinkar turn the tables from last week and this week discuss
[Unknown]: singers who decided to be actors and how they have fared.
[Unknown]: On the Pragati podcast, Manoj Kevalramani joins our host Pawan to explain the ongoing
[Unknown]: Hong Kong protests and its history so far.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get you back to your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: This is that challenging part of the show where I come back from a break and I have
[Amit Varma]: to remember all my guest names.
[Amit Varma]: I have with me Shruti Rajgopalan, Vivek Kaul, Rajeshwari Sengupta, in the order that we
[Amit Varma]: will go through our next reforms.
[Amit Varma]: Reform number four, Shruti's reform number two, coming up now.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, so my next big reform actually coincides well with the point that Rajeshwari made about
[Guest 1]: fiscal discipline.
[Guest 1]: Though that's not the only goal of this reform.
[Guest 1]: So I wish India to be more fiscally federal, right?
[Guest 1]: So India, I mean, India's federal structure is very centripetal.
[Guest 1]: So I don't know, we are all different generations here, but my generation read civics books
[Guest 1]: that said India is a federal country with a unitary bias.
[Guest 1]: Is that what yours also read?
[Amit Varma]: Something like that?
[Amit Varma]: I have to hold to remember civics.
[Guest 1]: And no, I remember the sentence because I went around asking everyone what the hell
[Guest 1]: this means.
[Guest 1]: And now I figured out what it means.
[Guest 1]: It means India is not federal.
[Guest 1]: And so, you know, one of the core reasons is there is an administrative federalism,
[Guest 1]: but there is no fiscal federalism.
[Guest 1]: And what I mean by that is our taxes and spending are highly centralized, right?
[Guest 1]: Now less and less so in the last 25 years or so, we have this fine establishment called
[Guest 1]: the Finance Commission, where all our taxes, you know, think of it as sort of, you know,
[Guest 1]: you collect all the taxes in one basket, and then the finance, it would go to the Finance
[Guest 1]: Commission, not physically, but the idea of it, and they would make a split between how
[Guest 1]: much the center gets and how much the state gets.
[Guest 1]: And there are a whole number of ways to figure this out.
[Guest 1]: One was, you know, union government was really under central planning.
[Guest 1]: That's one part.
[Guest 1]: The other part was, you know, depending on how poor the state is, or how much development
[Guest 1]: it needs, or how much infrastructure needs to be built, get more money or less money.
[Guest 1]: This is a giant rent-seeking exercise.
[Guest 1]: There have been papers written on how, you know, this kind of fiscal control was used
[Guest 1]: to punish opposition governments.
[Guest 1]: So if you're the same party in the state forming government as the center, you could, you know,
[Guest 1]: tend to get more money, then I think Stuti Khemani at the World Bank has written on this.
[Guest 1]: And you know, if you're an opposition party forming a government in a state, they deny
[Guest 1]: you the budget, and that's how they hold up.
[Guest 1]: So one of the big, there are three reasons I want to see more fiscal federalism.
[Guest 1]: The first is, we want more public goods.
[Guest 1]: And what we mean by more public goods, most of the time, is we want the garbage outside
[Guest 1]: our house to be picked up.
[Guest 1]: We want better roads, we, you know, we all managed to get here on time.
[Guest 1]: But I got here on time because I sort of accounted for 25-30 minute delay, which turned out to
[Guest 1]: be true, because it's pouring in Bombay, and you know, every road is dug up, and it's a
[Guest 1]: total mess.
[Guest 1]: We would like to have better public infrastructure, right, we'd like airports to be better, trains
[Guest 1]: to be better.
[Guest 1]: We would like public schooling to be better, which is, you know, one function is the reforms
[Guest 1]: we talked about, the other is expenditure.
[Guest 1]: So we would like to see a lot of spending at the local municipal level.
[Guest 1]: And our municipal governments have no money.
[Guest 3]: And the reason for that...
[Guest 3]: Except for BMC.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, which is a very rich, because they're building the metro, which is a very rich municipal
[Guest 1]: corporation.
[Guest 1]: But overall, the centre devolves money to the states, and then the state has the option
[Guest 1]: of devolving money.
[Guest 1]: So you know, like, there's a central finance commission, every state has its own finance
[Guest 1]: commission post the 73rd and 74th amendment.
[Guest 1]: And depending on whether you're talking about the rural or the urban areas, the state is
[Guest 1]: supposed to devolve finances to local government.
[Guest 1]: That is not a condition.
[Guest 1]: It's not mandatory.
[Guest 1]: Right?
[Guest 1]: It's a choice.
[Guest 1]: So what ends up happening is, the states are spending a lot of money.
[Guest 1]: And the union governments are spending a lot of money.
[Guest 1]: But they're spending it on all useless things, as Rajeshwari pointed out, right?
[Guest 1]: They're not spending it on the things we care about.
[Guest 1]: So you can have government spending, which causes both stimulus, also builds infrastructure
[Guest 1]: and also delivers public goods to the people who need it the most.
[Guest 1]: But the money never goes there.
[Guest 1]: The money goes to satisfy special interests with these freebies that are highly targeted
[Guest 1]: to capture one vote bank or another, or you know, for uptakes like this whole toilet building
[Guest 1]: thing with just you know, I mean, then I've talked about it just drives us crazy.
[Guest 1]: So one huge, you know, this is one reform, which can sort of kill a lot of birds with
[Guest 1]: one stone.
[Guest 1]: One part of it is municipal governments will be more empowered.
[Guest 1]: So I get this idea from all the condo associations that I see, you know, they collect this common
[Guest 1]: charges of fees that you see in Bombay and Delhi, and actually spend that money, right?
[Guest 1]: And when you go to these condo association meetings, people are really up in arms about
[Guest 1]: an increased charge or you know, you took money to build a you know, water filtration
[Guest 1]: plant and then never got built and there's all this.
[Guest 1]: So there's a lot of local politics, which can be tied to fiscal feedback.
[Guest 1]: And that's an opportunity we're missing right now.
[Guest 1]: Right?
[Guest 1]: So the municipal corporator, no one knows his name.
[Guest 1]: That's one problem.
[Guest 1]: So this will solve that problem.
[Guest 1]: The second problem it will solve is, it will divide the functions of different levels of
[Guest 1]: government much better.
[Guest 1]: Right?
[Guest 1]: So the union government is supposed to maintain law and order at the highest level, right?
[Guest 1]: Interstate highways, interstate river water, right, foreign trade, of course, safety and
[Guest 1]: security of the country, right?
[Guest 1]: That's all that kind of expenditure, or you know, large externalities, like pollution
[Guest 1]: across states.
[Guest 1]: That's really the job of the union government.
[Guest 1]: Everything within the state, which is your, you know, local highway, all your public parks,
[Guest 1]: you know, which are going beyond municipal boundaries.
[Guest 1]: That's the job of the state government and then, you know, lower level further municipal
[Guest 1]: government.
[Guest 1]: And we just don't have that clean demarcation.
[Guest 1]: But the moment you make a demarcation with money, the demarcation and goods will be a
[Guest 1]: little bit more, it won't be automatic, it won't happen overnight, but it will happen
[Guest 1]: over a period of time.
[Guest 1]: Right?
[Guest 1]: And if you look at the state spending in a place like Maharashtra, disproportionate amount
[Guest 1]: goes to rural and farmers freebies, right?
[Guest 1]: Even though Maharashtra has been urbanizing at a very rapid pace, right?
[Guest 1]: And that doesn't get reflected and the spending is at the state level.
[Guest 1]: And Mumbai citizens are underrepresented in votes and overrepresented in revenue giving,
[Guest 1]: but not in expenditure.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you and I had an episode on this on urban governance where we spoke about the
[Guest 1]: mismatch between power and accountability.
[Guest 1]: Exactly.
[Guest 1]: So that's the second part, right?
[Guest 1]: So first is we actually get public goods.
[Guest 1]: The second solution is it actually demarcates what each level of government is supposed
[Guest 1]: to do and can do.
[Guest 1]: And the third part is tying the hands of government, which is what Rajeshwari was talking about.
[Guest 1]: I think this is a bottom up way of tying the hands of government, right?
[Guest 1]: You allot different fiscal resources and therefore different levels of fiscal accountability.
[Guest 1]: I would like to live in a world where the maximum spending is done by the municipal
[Guest 1]: government because that has the tightest feedback level, right, at that level.
[Guest 1]: And also that's where we use the public resources the most.
[Guest 1]: You want a public library, you want a public park, you want poor children in your area
[Guest 1]: to have, you know, certain things despite their income level, which is, you know, access
[Guest 1]: to schools and access to water and access to vaccination.
[Guest 1]: So that's what I would like to see.
[Guest 1]: So that's the second part.
[Guest 1]: Now, the fiscal responsibility, because of the tight feedback, you automatically, you
[Guest 1]: know, you first of all create a check between government.
[Guest 1]: So there's a horizontal separation of powers, but there's also a vertical separation of
[Guest 1]: powers, right?
[Guest 1]: So this way, municipal government, state government and union government have to fight over the
[Guest 1]: size of the pie and how they split it, which is a really good check for each other.
[Guest 1]: And the second is, this is a bottom up way of really tying the hands of the union government,
[Guest 1]: which is what is doing a bulk of the sharing of the spending.
[Guest 1]: And that's why it is so mistargeted, right?
[Guest 1]: So you absolutely right, you know, both Rajeshwari and Vivek have said, we've been in some kind
[Guest 1]: of stimulus mode for the last two years.
[Guest 1]: It's just it's not working like a stimulus, because it's all nonsense that we're spending
[Guest 1]: on.
[Guest 1]: So you can also stimulate the economy, you can, you have different livers to pull, you
[Guest 1]: have more sophisticated livers to pull, though I don't believe in that kind of like hydraulic
[Guest 1]: Keynesianism.
[Guest 1]: But even if you were of that school, you have more sophisticated livers to pull when you
[Guest 1]: can split fiscal levels.
[Amit Varma]: And what also strikes me is that this would then change incentives.
[Amit Varma]: Because the point is, if you know, local neighborhoods are so empowered and are doing so much spending,
[Amit Varma]: people can vote with their feet and go to where the governance is the best, which improves
[Guest 1]: everybody's incentives.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, and voting with your feet is naturally much easier when the geographical distances
[Guest 1]: are small, right?
[Guest 1]: You can go from Khar to Juhu and Juhu to Andheri much more easily.
[Guest 1]: Then you can go from Maharashtra to Gujarat, right?
[Guest 1]: Or from India to Pakistan, which is what people keep telling me I should be doing, right?
[Guest 1]: So this is one kind of voting with your feet, which is made lower cost, because voting with
[Guest 1]: your feet comes with a constraint, you have to uproot your whole life.
[Guest 1]: So that's one part that makes the feedback mechanism tighter.
[Guest 1]: The second part that makes the feedback mechanism tighter is your voters are your taxpayers.
[Guest 1]: So there is much, you know, even though first of all, all of us are not voting for Modi
[Guest 1]: ji, right, it's a representative system.
[Guest 1]: The second is, all of us are not paying taxes, right?
[Guest 1]: So there is this really big problem of everyone who voted for Modi ji and everyone who is
[Guest 1]: paying taxes to Modi ji.
[Guest 1]: And I say Modi ji because he's the one really, you know, in control, right?
[Guest 1]: That's not a slip of the tongue.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, please don't ask Shruti to go to Pakistan, people.
[Guest 1]: No, you can ask me, I would love to visit.
[Guest 1]: She'll go via Dubai.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, when people ask me to go to Pakistan
[Guest 1]: Or via United States, which is where I live.
[Amit Varma]: When people ask me to go to Pakistan, I say, been there, done that, I mean, which is true.
[Guest 1]: I haven't been there.
[Guest 1]: I'd love to go.
[Guest 1]: I have no problem.
[Guest 1]: I just have a problem with people ordering me on what my travel plans should be.
[Guest 2]: That is what I'm most offended by.
[Guest 2]: So essentially, you're talking of a more decentralization kind of thing.
[Guest 1]: No, I'm actually not talking about decentralization, I'm talking about genuine fiscal federalism.
[Guest 1]: What we have right now is decentralization.
[Guest 1]: And I'll tell you what I think the difference is.
[Guest 1]: Decentralization is that the head decides what the hand will get, right?
[Guest 1]: I am the center, you are my sub-center and I'm going to
[Guest 1]: Federalism requires that they own separate power centers, right?
[Guest 1]: What we have in India is a very large degree of decentralization without federalism, which
[Guest 1]: is, you know, I don't want to just pull Kashmir into everything, but a very large part of
[Guest 1]: the uproar that came from Tamil Nadu and the other states, actually very little uproar,
[Guest 1]: according to me, but you know, one part of the uproar was that, you know, we're all states
[Guest 1]: until we are union territories when we are, right?
[Guest 1]: Which is really true because we are all really agents of the union government, which is not
[Guest 1]: true.
[Guest 1]: We're not the central government of India, we're a union of states, right?
[Guest 1]: So we're never
[Guest 1]: If you look at the constitution, the central government is called the union government,
[Guest 1]: right?
[Guest 1]: It's the union of states, but it never set it up as such because you can't just administratively
[Guest 1]: make a union and not give them any revenue raising capacity.
[Guest 1]: That's what makes a federal government, a federal government.
[Guest 1]: So right now we are centripetal because we have three lists, but we have enough loopholes
[Guest 1]: in the constitution that the center can usurp any of the three lists completely, right?
[Guest 1]: And there's enough vagueness there.
[Guest 1]: So that's one.
[Guest 1]: That is not the case in genuinely federal countries like Switzerland or United States
[Guest 1]: and so on.
[Guest 1]: The second part of it is, of course, the fiscal map.
[Guest 1]: The third part of it is, all the ancillary services we provide are highly centripetal,
[Guest 1]: right?
[Guest 1]: The union Supreme Court, which is the only Supreme Court we have, that determines what
[Guest 1]: every high court will do, right?
[Guest 1]: Every state high court.
[Guest 1]: So now this comes down in culture.
[Guest 1]: You know, there is a system by which, you know, your planning commission at the center,
[Guest 2]: every state planning commission is like
[Guest 2]: Actually, this has very interesting implications for financing.
[Guest 2]: For financing.
[Guest 2]: For example, instead of a finance commission distributing across different states, etc.
[Guest 2]: Something that I have thought about for quite some time is a very small thing like a municipal
[Guest 2]: bond.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: You know, I mean, it's like in Bombay or other municipalities, instead of waiting for some
[Guest 2]: funding to come, why can't we just issue municipal bonds?
[Guest 2]: Or tax it.
[Guest 2]: Exactly.
[Guest 1]: Or tax it.
[Guest 1]: People of Bombay are paying enough tax and are happy to spend it on resources instead
[Guest 2]: of, you know, going through potholes.
[Guest 2]: So since we are dreaming, I'll just, Vivek, just give me two minutes.
[Guest 2]: I'll just take off on a little bit of another tangent, but related.
[Guest 2]: Since we are dreaming is how about now we all know that the cities of India are really
[Guest 2]: struggling, right?
[Guest 2]: There's a water crisis.
[Guest 2]: There's an infrastructure crisis in Bombay, in Madras, in Calcutta, wherever, right?
[Guest 2]: So how about converting the top 10 cities of India into states?
[Guest 2]: And just hear me out a little bit on this.
[Guest 2]: The model that I have in mind is like a New York or a London, which have their own directly
[Guest 2]: elected mayors.
[Guest 2]: And the mayors are like the CEOs of the New York government and the London City Council.
[Guest 2]: And they're basically responsible for running the institution, the economic development,
[Guest 2]: the infrastructure, everything in the cities.
[Guest 2]: What is happening in our cities is, as Shruti pointed out, is, for example, in Bombay, right?
[Guest 2]: Bombay is generating a lot of tax revenue, so to speak.
[Guest 2]: But how much of that is something that's really coming to the Bombay for Bombay's own development?
[Guest 2]: Now, I come from Calcutta, which was once called the Paris of India, East India, no
[Guest 2]: longer the case.
[Guest 2]: Calcutta is held hostage by a lot of politics of the hinterland.
[Guest 2]: The chief minister of Calcutta or chief minister of Bengal has to bother a lot about what's
[Guest 2]: happening in the rural state, because West Bengal is essentially a rural state.
[Guest 2]: What's happening in the hinterland politics of the districts and villages.
[Guest 2]: And much less attention gets actually paid to what the city needs.
[Guest 2]: And as a result, the city is really struggling today in terms of jobs, infrastructure, institutions,
[Guest 2]: everything.
[Guest 2]: So instead of that, since we have a familiar machinery of the state, why not convert the
[Guest 2]: top 10 cities into states so that they get the autonomy, they get autonomy of financing,
[Guest 2]: they get autonomy of economic development of those regions.
[Guest 2]: But then you can have real good development pockets, instead of saying that there are
[Guest 2]: only two big cities in India, which is Bombay and Delhi.
[Guest 1]: So this is just a thought that came up.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I would say, you know, I mean, the conversion of the administrative structure from a city
[Guest 1]: to a state or a state to a city with a mayor, that's easy enough.
[Guest 2]: We have mayors already.
[Guest 2]: See, mayor problem is in Indian political structure, the mayor will always be kept subservient
[Guest 2]: to the chief minister.
[Guest 2]: So the mayor will never be able to do things autonomously because the chief minister in
[Guest 2]: the political hierarchy will be the more powerful one.
[Unknown]: But I think it's not a political hierarchy.
[Guest 1]: Instead, let's just convert them into states and make them each an autonomous unit.
[Guest 1]: No, I disagree.
[Guest 1]: I don't think the problem is because of the mayor is lower than the chief minister.
[Guest 1]: I think the mayor is lower than the chief minister because he doesn't control his own
[Guest 1]: budget.
[Guest 2]: So my point is, why even have this?
[Unknown]: He's a mayor, mayor.
[Amit Varma]: He's a mayor, mayor.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: So by the way, relatively okay joke.
[Unknown]: You know, we like to compare New York and London.
[Guest 2]: I'm not comparing.
[Guest 2]: I'm saying that.
[Guest 1]: But they're different in the sense that in New York, the mayor doesn't control his own
[Guest 1]: budget.
[Guest 1]: He controls his own company.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Unknown]: London, it is set by the council of London.
[Guest 2]: So I'm saying is instead of going into the complication of mayor, why, how about dreaming
[Guest 2]: that we convert the top 10 cities into states and have their own autonomous political financial
[Guest 1]: unit?
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: I'm saying you're still beholden to the center.
[Guest 1]: It's another kind of decentralization.
[Amit Varma]: I think she's saying in addition to what you are saying.
[Guest 1]: No, even then I'm saying that is just changing the outfit a little bit and changing the boundaries
[Guest 1]: a little bit.
[Guest 1]: I don't even care what they're called.
[Unknown]: Right.
[Guest 2]: As long as they're not agents of the union.
[Guest 2]: In a dream world where we have the fiscal federalism, in that world, how about we convert
[Guest 2]: the citizens?
[Guest 1]: I think it'll happen automatically.
[Guest 1]: I don't think we'll have to convert them.
[Guest 1]: I think the mayor of Bombay will be the most important person in Maharashtra that day.
[Guest 2]: I'm not so sure because the finances may work out, but I'm not sure how the politics will
[Guest 2]: work out.
[Guest 3]: I think Vivek had a point.
[Guest 3]: Vivek had a point.
[Guest 3]: No, no.
[Guest 3]: I mean, basically what we need is 10 Arvind Kejriwals.
[Amit Varma]: Please don't say that.
[Guest 3]: We need one less than we have, frankly.
[Guest 3]: What I was basically saying is that, I mean, if you if you look at the structure of all
[Guest 3]: government in India, I mean, it's like a funnel.
[Guest 3]: So we're very broad at the top.
[Guest 3]: And then as we go down, we become extremely narrow.
[Guest 3]: So and why is that the case?
[Guest 3]: And why is it difficult to change?
[Guest 3]: Now, take a look at I mean, so this is something I've thought about for a while.
[Guest 3]: And the example that I like to give is take a look at the ministry or the minister of
[Guest 3]: civil aviation.
[Guest 3]: Okay.
[Guest 3]: Now, if you take Air India out from him, so in the same way, I mean, you know, a lot of
[Guest 3]: ministries, if you take the PSUs away from them, I mean, they're gone.
[Guest 3]: I mean, Ministry of Coal, you take Coal India, let's say you don't privatize, let's say you
[Guest 3]: sell all the shares and I mean, then what does the Shruti's dog is named Coal, they'll
[Amit Varma]: nationalize Shruti's dog, maybe, maybe so.
[Guest 2]: Amit is just all guns blazing today, like, no holds barred.
[Guest 3]: So this is not a joke.
[Guest 3]: This is legit.
[Amit Varma]: My dog, she has, she has a dog name, but what Amit said about that, I'm sorry, I should
[Amit Varma]: really stop.
[Guest 3]: I'm behaving like Cyrus.
[Guest 3]: Please continue.
[Guest 3]: I mean, obviously you used to write for Cyrus, so that has to come out in 1998, continue,
[Amit Varma]: continue.
[Amit Varma]: Can we cut all of this?
[Amit Varma]: No, we are not.
[Amit Varma]: This is a fun part.
[Guest 3]: For those of you who don't know, Amit also coined the, you know, the word Bakra, MTV
[Amit Varma]: Bakra.
[Unknown]: I didn't coin the word Bakra, but yes, I was responsible for naming the show, I was responsible
[Unknown]: for naming the show.
[Guest 3]: I have been on a Cyrus Says episode where we have discussed that, kindly let us go back
[Guest 3]: to dream reforms instead of nightmare past.
[Guest 3]: What I was trying to say is that, so the big government won't go precisely because you
[Guest 3]: have people at the top who have incentives to ensure that it continues.
[Guest 3]: So unless that changes, so everything, you know, else is a dream.
[Amit Varma]: Sure, but I mean, everything we're discussing in this episode, if we bring the political
[Guest 3]: economy into it, it's a khattam.
[Guest 3]: I understand that.
[Guest 3]: But now I think we should also have a disclaimer.
[Guest 3]: I mean, while we should dream, but dreaming with disclaimers is always a better idea.
[Guest 3]: Otherwise you get into a dream sequence, you know, which is not dreaming with disclaimers.
[Amit Varma]: It's very Indian thing.
[Amit Varma]: So horrendous.
[Guest 3]: Now it is time for your second dream reform is over, kindly give us something.
[Guest 3]: So I think, you know, I mean, the second thing I want to talk about was basically tax reforms.
[Guest 3]: And, you know, because we've talked about increasing the tax base.
[Guest 3]: So people talk about the fact that, you know, India doesn't pay enough tax because enough
[Guest 3]: Indians don't make enough money, which is true at many levels.
[Guest 3]: But what is also true is that our tax filing system is so bloody complicated, that it drives
[Guest 3]: away people from being honest.
[Amit Varma]: What I should briefly point out at just this point is that you're talking really about
[Guest 3]: income tax, because everybody basically pays income tax, and I'm talking about the goods
[Guest 3]: and services tax.
[Amit Varma]: Sure, but you're right that not everybody pays those, but everybody pays tax, every
[Amit Varma]: Indian is a taxpayer, because anything you buy, you buy soap, you buy soap, you pay tax.
[Guest 3]: Which is true.
[Guest 3]: But what I'm trying to say is...
[Amit Varma]: For our listeners, I wanted to clarify that you're speaking about this particular category
[Guest 3]: when you said tax, lest this becomes a gotcha moment on Twitter.
[Guest 3]: I mean, someone will, some smart alec will come, everybody pays tax.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so...
[Unknown]: They'll come anyway.
[Guest 3]: So, what I was saying is, if you look at something as simple as our tax return forms, every year
[Guest 3]: there are changes in it.
[Guest 3]: Why?
[Guest 3]: I mean, why can't a tax return form be a stable sort of thing, which this chartered accountant
[Guest 3]: doesn't have to figure out every year, what has changed this year?
[Guest 3]: Or take into account the fact that we have some six, seven, eight types of capital gains.
[Guest 3]: So there is one capital gain for stocks and equity mutual funds, one for debt mutual funds,
[Guest 3]: one for real estate, one for gold.
[Guest 3]: Why?
[Guest 3]: I mean, you know, you have to have one, you know, capital gain is capital gain, and you
[Guest 3]: tax it like that.
[Guest 3]: I mean, in some cases you have indexation, in some cases you have no indexation.
[Guest 3]: So the point is that you have to have a stable tax system.
[Guest 3]: Now, look at something like GST, you know, every time the GST council meets, there is
[Guest 3]: some change.
[Guest 3]: So there are changes which are happening at the central level, there are changes which
[Guest 3]: are happening at the state level, which is why, you know, if you look at the annual return
[Guest 3]: for 2017-18 of GST, only 20% of people have filed it till date.
[Guest 3]: So I think you need to have a stable tax system.
[Guest 3]: And in case of GST, what has happened is, they've obviously launched it without thinking
[Guest 3]: it through.
[Guest 3]: So they have to keep changing it.
[Guest 3]: Now, you know, you can't keep changing it every week or every, you know, every time
[Guest 3]: the GST council meets.
[Guest 3]: So better thing to do right now would be to sit down and figure out what is wrong, and
[Guest 3]: then make major changes at a single go, instead of meeting every time and tweaking this and
[Guest 3]: tweaking that and making, you know, things difficult for everyone.
[Guest 3]: So like, if you if you sort of, you know, pick up the what is called as the HSN book,
[Guest 3]: which is, you know, the codes for the economic activity you carry out, if you are in the
[Guest 3]: goods part, and then there is something for the services part as well.
[Guest 3]: Now, it's a huge thick thing.
[Guest 3]: I mean, why?
[Guest 1]: It's about 16,000 entries.
[Guest 3]: Why are you why are you complicating these things?
[Guest 3]: I mean, you know, you can have, let's say two rates and just, you know, 12% for goods
[Guest 3]: and 15% for services and get done, get along, you know, get on with it.
[Guest 3]: But then, you know, you'll have the argument on the fact that how can, you know, something
[Guest 3]: that everyone is using and Mercedes be taxed at the same rate.
[Guest 3]: But boss, Mercedes, if it comes to 1 crore, then 15% tax will come to 15 lakhs.
[Guest 3]: This is something that, you know, people don't get, but then they don't want, they're not
[Guest 3]: happy with 15 lakhs, they want 43 lakhs, because they want to tax it at 42% or 43% or whatever.
[Guest 3]: So as long so, you know, this is something that will sort of also help, I mean, along
[Guest 3]: with being a structural reform, it will also have an immediate impact on economic activity.
[Guest 2]: So I want to add to what Vivek said that I completely agree that simplifying tax administration
[Guest 2]: is something that we have been discussing for a very long time.
[Guest 2]: And it's one of those things that we all know needs to be done, but never really gets done.
[Guest 2]: And we actually end up complicating more and more with this new GST fiasco.
[Guest 2]: The other thing that I think is also very important to understand is if you want to
[Guest 2]: avoid tax evasion, and if you want to expand the tax base, it's very important to keep
[Guest 2]: the tax rates low.
[Guest 2]: I think we just don't get that math at all, because our tax revenue is the multiplied
[Guest 2]: product of tax base and tax rate.
[Guest 2]: Now, if you want to increase the base, you have to lower the rate, otherwise, if you
[Guest 2]: keep the tax system at a very high rate, the probability of tax evasion goes up that much
[Guest 2]: more.
[Guest 2]: And then in order to justify the high rate, you also give a lot of exemptions.
[Guest 2]: And then the exemptions increase the leakages from the system even more.
[Guest 2]: And then in the end, you're sitting with a really complicated system that you cannot
[Guest 2]: monitor because you don't have enough employees in your tax administration.
[Guest 2]: So it's a total mess at the end of the day.
[Guest 2]: So two easy and finite things to do is one is ease tax administration by doing the logistical
[Guest 2]: reforms of filing ease and all of that, and lower the taxes, be direct tax, indirect tax.
[Guest 2]: Our corporate income tax is one of the highest in the world.
[Guest 2]: It doesn't have to be so in a country when we want to encourage investment and make in
[Guest 2]: India and all of that.
[Guest 2]: So lower the tax rate and make the tax administration easy.
[Guest 2]: You will expand the tax base.
[Guest 2]: And with that expanded tax base, again, coming back to the point of anti-fiscal discipline,
[Guest 2]: if you then have a tax base, which is expanded, then you remain within the means of the tax
[Guest 2]: revenue and you spend.
[Guest 2]: But all of these things are stuff that again, we have talked about, but for whatever reason
[Guest 2]: and political economy, etc, there is a lot of inertia to do this.
[Guest 3]: I mean, look at what Nirmala Sitharaman did in her first budget, introduced, basically
[Guest 3]: increased the surcharges and now there are tax slabs at 39 percent and 42.74 percent.
[Guest 3]: Now, the point is, OK, you know, you're looking at, you know, increasing the tax revenue and
[Guest 3]: so on.
[Guest 3]: But for these people at these levels, so people who earn two to five crore or five crore or
[Guest 3]: more, and it's very easy to leave the country and go live somewhere else.
[Guest 3]: I mean, they go to you can easily go to Dubai properties as expensive as it is in Mumbai.
[Guest 2]: And for businesses to basically invest elsewhere, a foreign direct investment outside of India
[Guest 2]: is actually increasing every year.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, this is a point Vivek, you made in our budget episode, which earned you the nickname
[Guest 3]: the Shah Rukh Khan of economics.
[Guest 1]: You were the Govinda of podcasting.
[Guest 1]: One more thing.
[Guest 1]: I think none of this is a surprise.
[Guest 1]: So a couple of things on this GST classification problem.
[Guest 1]: First up, I do want to point out, it's extremely regressive and anti poor.
[Guest 1]: You know, I mean, Palaji has been in the news because they've just laid off 10,000 employees
[Guest 1]: and biscuit sales are down.
[Guest 1]: Palaji's GST rate, I believe is 18% on biscuits, is that accurate?
[Guest 1]: I mean, if Vivek doesn't know, but it's high, it's double digits and it's high.
[Guest 1]: The GST on gold is 3%.
[Guest 1]: And right and the GST on diamonds is 0.25.
[Guest 1]: And if you go back and check the timing of reducing the GST on gold and diamond, it was
[Guest 1]: done for some handicrafts, cottage industry reason.
[Guest 1]: But it was just after demonetization and just before the Gujarat election, or just around
[Guest 3]: that time.
[Guest 3]: I'll interrupt you.
[Guest 3]: GST on biscuits is 18%.
[Guest 1]: 18%.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: So Palaji, which is the poor man's food, they have a five rupee biscuit packet, they have
[Guest 1]: a 12 rupee biscuit packet that is taxed at 18% GST.
[Guest 1]: So this whole bullshit about, oh, the Mercedes guy, you know, is going to only end up paying
[Guest 1]: 6% or 8%.
[Guest 1]: The guy who's homeless, you know, begging outside a temple is paying 18% GST on Palaji.
[Guest 3]: No, but there is a logic to it.
[Guest 3]: So we don't want people to have maida and sugar.
[Guest 3]: Maida is slow poison, sugar is poison.
[Guest 2]: As I think, I mean, I know, but we want people to have a lot of gold.
[Guest 3]: We want people to have the freedom to have poison.
[Guest 3]: We should have bhoonja chana, which is, yeah, savings to buy gold.
[Guest 1]: I know, I'm not so much of an economics nerd that I don't get the joke.
[Guest 1]: But just as a side note, this kind of paternalism nudging people to better food choices through
[Guest 3]: taxation is a really bad idea.
[Guest 3]: They wouldn't do it.
[Guest 2]: I mean, they're not doing that.
[Guest 1]: I know.
[Guest 2]: The whole idea of a good GST was to have a single rate for all goods and services.
[Unknown]: No, no, I understand.
[Guest 1]: But I'm saying we have gone so far away.
[Guest 1]: I understand.
[Guest 1]: But I'm not.
[Guest 1]: I think this is not a knowledge problem.
[Guest 1]: I think it's an incentive problem.
[Guest 1]: Of course.
[Guest 1]: If you have a proliferation of rates, you can control special interests.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: I mean, of course.
[Guest 3]: Again, the political economy, the difference between what economists suggest and what politicians
[Guest 3]: suggest.
[Guest 3]: I'll give you an example here.
[Guest 3]: In 2009, I think P. Chidambaram was the finance minister back then, we came up with the Direct
[Guest 3]: Taxes Code.
[Guest 3]: Okay.
[Guest 3]: Now, it was a very small code, which sort of was supposed to replace the Income Tax
[Guest 3]: Act.
[Guest 3]: And along with the code, they had an 80-page explainer.
[Guest 3]: Okay.
[Guest 3]: Imagine the Income Tax Act of India being explained in just 80 pages.
[Guest 3]: And I remember reading it over two to three hours and then writing a piece around it.
[Guest 3]: So I read it in three hours also, obviously, it was scuttled, because if that had come
[Guest 3]: through, you know, all the CAs would have gone out of job, and the IRS people would
[Guest 3]: have gone out of job, I mean, they wouldn't have gone out of job, but then the rent seeking
[Guest 3]: would have stopped.
[Guest 3]: And so the moment, you know, P. Chidambaram was moved to Home Ministry, and our man, Pranab
[Guest 3]: Mukherjee took over, I mean, it just got...
[Guest 3]: Now we have a new Direct Taxes Code, which I mean, the news about it came up, which Vivek
[Guest 1]: cannot read in three hours.
[Amit Varma]: No, I haven't.
[Amit Varma]: I had an episode with Pooja Mehra on what the Chidambaram to Pranab Mukherjee shift
[Unknown]: did.
[Amit Varma]: And that was a great episode.
[Amit Varma]: And Pooja, unfortunately, is in Delhi, otherwise, we would have invited her to the studio for
[Guest 1]: this.
[Guest 1]: And it's a lovely book.
[Guest 1]: Please read Pooja Mehra's book.
[Amit Varma]: Please read Pooja Mehra's Lost Decade.
[Amit Varma]: And I should also point out that both Vivek and Shruti have done episodes with me on
[Guest 1]: GST.
[Guest 1]: Very fine episodes.
[Amit Varma]: Very fine episodes.
[Amit Varma]: Magnificent.
[Amit Varma]: And the last one of them was with Shruti.
[Amit Varma]: And if I remember correctly, it was called the Bad and Complex Tax, which sums it up
[Guest 3]: and kind of sums up what you're saying about your...
[Guest 3]: Simplify it.
[Guest 3]: That's your reading.
[Guest 3]: PCT.
[Guest 3]: I mean, I pay GST every month.
[Amit Varma]: I'm in a bad state.
[Amit Varma]: I'm in a bad state too.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just keeping track of...
[Amit Varma]: Dude, I give invoices, pay GST, but I don't get the money.
[Amit Varma]: GST is coming out of my pocket.
[Amit Varma]: So we are basically financing the government, right?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, because there is a... it's bad working capital management at the moment.
[Amit Varma]: It's like the great Sharad Joshi ji said, negative subsidy.
[Unknown]: And how many times...
[Guest 1]: There's a great Sharad Joshi biography that has come out, I believe.
[Guest 2]: I'm going to go look for it.
[Guest 2]: How many times have you faced situations where the guy says that, madam, if you pay in cash,
[Guest 2]: then there won't be any GST.
[Unknown]: Oh, by the way, this is not just...
[Guest 2]: Nobody is even caring about doing the billing and the receipts and everything.
[Guest 3]: It's like it's easier for them.
[Unknown]: No, no, no.
[Unknown]: I have discovered entire supply chains that are working in cash.
[Guest 1]: So my tailor in Delhi, you can do everything by the book.
[Guest 1]: But you know, GST has that whole supply chain backward linkage issue, right?
[Guest 1]: So she has a set of books for GST clients.
[Guest 3]: She has a set of books for non-GST clients.
[Guest 3]: This is a very old thing.
[Guest 3]: It has always been in India.
[Unknown]: You know, corporates have...
[Guest 3]: I mean, forget your tailor.
[Guest 2]: Corporates have always had books for income taxwala and their own book.
[Guest 2]: So there is a reason why post-demonetization, cash utilization has come back to exactly
[Unknown]: the free levels.
[Unknown]: Absolutely.
[Guest 2]: Because nobody cares about these things anymore.
[Unknown]: Because you've figured out ways to do jugaar again.
[Guest 1]: No, but it tells you something when my tailor is doing it.
[Guest 1]: It doesn't...
[Guest 1]: I mean, I'm not surprised that the corporates are sophisticated enough, but the GST is such
[Guest 1]: a huge burden.
[Guest 1]: Of course.
[Unknown]: She's hurting them more.
[Guest 1]: She's running a tailor shop no larger than this room in her own home.
[Guest 3]: You still have tailors in India?
[Amit Varma]: Yaar, tu matlab bahut hi elite ka elite hai.
[Amit Varma]: Just now you will realize, Shruti, when we were discussing GST rates, he did not know
[Amit Varma]: GST rate for biscuit, but he knew GST rate for diamond and gold.
[Guest 3]: Vivek Kaur, you have been exposed.
[Guest 3]: Yeah, you're supposed to know.
[Guest 3]: But I knew the GST rate for Mercedes also.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Diamond gold pe kyu rukh rahe ho yaar?
[Amit Varma]: Uske upar jao toda.
[Guest 3]: It depends on how many diamonds you buy.
[Guest 3]: I don't believe.
[Guest 1]: Podcasters and journalists ki shaan hi alag hai.
[Amit Varma]: Shaan hi alag hai.
[Amit Varma]: Let's abhi agle reform pe move karte hain.
[Guest 2]: Rajeshwari ji ka turn hai.
[Amit Varma]: Rajeshwari ji, bachayiye humein is banter se.
[Guest 2]: I'm not even going to attempt to break into Hindi because then I'll be truly exposed.
[Guest 2]: So the next reform that I'm going to talk about is going to take us quite far away from
[Guest 2]: fiscal worries, etc.
[Guest 2]: It's actually about immigration.
[Guest 2]: And it's something that I'm very closely and very sincerely believe in, which is, so there's
[Guest 2]: a very fantastic book that has come out recently by Tony Joseph called Early Indians.
[Amit Varma]: I had an episode with him as well.
[Guest 2]: Fantastic.
[Guest 2]: I have not heard that and I will definitely.
[Guest 2]: So it's a compelling read where Tony Joseph uses recent pathbreaking DNA research to essentially
[Guest 2]: trace the history of Indians and essentially the truth that comes out of the book to summarize
[Guest 2]: in a sentence is who we are and where we have come from.
[Guest 2]: And the truth is that we are all immigrants and we have all come from somewhere else.
[Guest 2]: And of course, he talks about the waves of migration, so on and so forth.
[Guest 2]: So now, the reason I started with that is basically to say that there is nothing called
[Guest 2]: a pure Indian.
[Guest 2]: There's nothing called an indigenous Indian, right?
[Guest 2]: We are all from somewhere else.
[Guest 2]: And in that spirit and in a world where there is so much of intolerance now and border closing
[Guest 2]: obsessions and whatnot, I think that we should we should be a country again in the dream
[Guest 2]: world where we open up our gates and borders and doors, whatever you have, to whoever wants
[Guest 2]: to come and live in India.
[Guest 2]: Now, if that doesn't agree with your moral fiber, for whatever reason, then the next
[Guest 2]: layer I would say is open up the borders to those who are desperate and helpless, which
[Guest 2]: would be the refugees.
[Guest 2]: If that too doesn't agree with the moral fiber, for again, whatever reason, the third layer
[Guest 2]: that I would settle down in my dream world is open up your gates to those who are skilled.
[Guest 2]: For example, whoever has an undergraduate degree from a decent university in the world,
[Guest 2]: give them immediately a work visa and let them work in India and after 10 years, naturalize
[Guest 2]: them and give them Indian citizenship or encourage students from all over the world to come and
[Guest 2]: study in Indian colleges and universities.
[Guest 2]: And don't stop at giving them a college degree, offer them jobs, offer them citizenship.
[Guest 2]: I think India should aspire to be a country where people want the Indian citizenship.
[Guest 2]: And that should be the level that we should dream about instead of saying that we are
[Guest 2]: going to be this very insular country where we care about indigenous Indians.
[Guest 2]: And I think we are going exactly the regressive way because immigrants are great because immigrants,
[Guest 2]: they bring knowledge, they bring capabilities, they integrate us with their countries.
[Guest 2]: They help knowledge sharing.
[Guest 2]: They are, research shows, they're low on crime because they are scared of getting deported.
[Guest 2]: So they basically work hard to stand on their own feet.
[Guest 2]: They don't have a political clout, so they don't ask for your welfare benefits.
[Guest 2]: And there are countries which have been built by immigrants, as we all know.
[Guest 2]: I mean, my favorite example is Steve Jobs, who was the child, illegitimate child of a
[Guest 2]: Syrian father who was a refugee, so to speak, in the U.S. and a Catholic mother of Swiss
[Guest 2]: German descent.
[Guest 2]: And that would be impossible today because Syrian refugee would obviously be turned away.
[Guest 2]: The other example, of course, is Barack Obama, who is the child of a Kenyan father and a
[Guest 2]: mother of, and let me remember this correctly, English, Swiss, German, Scottish, Irish and
[Guest 2]: Welsh ancestry.
[Guest 2]: And they got married at a time when Barack Obama's father was a student in Hawaii on
[Guest 2]: scholarship, a foreign student on scholarship.
[Guest 2]: So and there are, of course, many, many such examples, right?
[Guest 2]: So I think India, in my dream world, we should aspire to be that country where we are open
[Guest 2]: to immigrants and we are naturalizing them into citizenship.
[Guest 2]: We will not get the good brains of U.S. and Europe, perhaps, but we will get the good
[Guest 2]: brains of South Asian countries, of Middle Eastern countries, of African countries.
[Guest 2]: And I think that is great, and that's what we should dream about.
[Guest 3]: This reminds me of a Javed Akhtar song, Panchi Nadiya, Pawan Ke Jhoke, Koi Sarad Naon Hai
[Unknown]: Hoke.
[Amit Varma]: Refugee songs.
[Amit Varma]: This is very, this is not pre-planned at all.
[Unknown]: We did not know each other.
[Amit Varma]: Sing, Vivek is just this encyclopediac brain on this.
[Guest 1]: It's a lovely song.
[Guest 1]: The movie is terrible.
[Amit Varma]: I have to say this is a great reform.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with you entirely.
[Amit Varma]: I had an episode on immigration also.
[Guest 3]: I've had so many episodes.
[Guest 3]: But how do you explain then what will happen to India's demographic dividend?
[Guest 3]: Our people are not getting jobs and foreigners are not getting jobs.
[Guest 2]: That's obviously not the kind of thinking that I would subscribe to when I'm dreaming
[Guest 2]: of immigration because that's why I had three layers, right?
[Guest 2]: I said, okay, once you open up the gates to everybody, doesn't agree with the moral fiber,
[Guest 2]: open up gates to refugees, doesn't agree to moral fiber.
[Guest 2]: If you're only allowing skilled people, I think the numbers will be too minuscule to
[Guest 2]: make a difference to a large demographic dividend, if anything.
[Guest 2]: And if you're really worried about it, then the Indian state should think about or the
[Guest 2]: private sector, the markets that you are not going to worsen the demographic dividend problem
[Guest 2]: by letting people coming in who are probably more skilled.
[Guest 2]: The whole idea is why should we be restricted to our local skill pool?
[Guest 2]: We should be able to access the skill pool everywhere in the world.
[Guest 2]: And starting with my initial premise, there is nothing called Indians to begin with.
[Guest 2]: We should first have a change of mindset instead of having that kind of an insular mentality.
[Guest 1]: I would add to what you're saying, not just for the immigration purposes, but also add
[Guest 1]: tourism to it, because I think it's pertinent, right?
[Guest 1]: I mean, there is a certain kind of immigration, which just goes to another country and just
[Guest 1]: moves there.
[Guest 1]: But I think people are more likely to mingle and, you know, think about living in another
[Guest 1]: place or working in another place or sharing their skills.
[Guest 1]: And you know, sort of this kind of cultural exchange, intellectual exchange, if they can
[Guest 1]: visit more easily, they've simplified the process of getting an Indian visa.
[Guest 1]: But it's still a hassle, right?
[Guest 1]: I mean, we can just do, you know, unilateral, no visa required to come to India.
[Guest 2]: Absolutely.
[Guest 2]: I mean, the tourist visa, but in the work visa, I was just reading up some of the rules.
[Guest 2]: I mean, the stipulation of the work visa is that the person applying for a visa needs
[Guest 2]: to have an income of 25,000 US dollars a year.
[Guest 2]: And only then can you be given a work visa.
[Guest 2]: That's almost about 20 lakhs a year.
[Guest 2]: Why do you have to have these stipulations to give a job?
[Guest 2]: If somebody wants to be a secretary or whatever it is, right?
[Guest 2]: Any job that the person wants, give him or her that job.
[Guest 2]: Why do you have this weird kind of a restriction?
[Guest 3]: And that too for five years, by the way.
[Guest 3]: So talking about tourism, a couple of years back, I went to Bali with my immediate family.
[Guest 3]: And so I remember this.
[Guest 3]: So when we were leaving Bombay, I sort of gave my passport to the Bureau of Immigration
[Guest 3]: and the guy said, where is the visa?
[Guest 3]: So I had to tell him that visa doesn't apply in Bali.
[Guest 3]: So then he said, no, but Veera, is visa on arrival?
[Guest 3]: I said, no, visa doesn't apply.
[Guest 3]: So he was very surprised that there is this place in Doha, you know, very close to where
[Guest 3]: we are, which doesn't require a visa.
[Guest 3]: And the best part is you land, you know, in Bali and you just walk out, I mean, they take
[Guest 3]: a picture and you walk out of the airport.
[Guest 3]: And there are more requirements, I mean, there were more requirements for me to fill up when
[Guest 3]: I came back to India.
[Guest 3]: And the other thing I really can't understand is that, you know, when someone is leaving
[Guest 3]: the country, you don't have to have a Bureau of Immigration there and, you know, create
[Guest 3]: a...
[Guest 3]: I can understand that, you know, when someone's coming back, when someone's coming into the
[Guest 3]: country, there has to be, you know, I mean, a check.
[Guest 3]: But when you're leaving the country, I mean, not my headache, right?
[Guest 1]: You know, my problem is not that they check it.
[Guest 1]: It's okay.
[Guest 1]: I mean, the stamp takes a minute.
[Guest 2]: The question is how cumbersome the process is and what is the reason for doing it?
[Guest 2]: And exactly the same for having foreign students coming in or foreign nationals coming in and
[Guest 2]: being here and getting a job and getting nationalized into India.
[Guest 2]: Why can't we dream of that world that it's possible there are people in South Asian countries
[Guest 2]: who would really give anything to come here and work and get a degree.
[Guest 2]: And that's perfectly fine for us because we actually benefit from it.
[Guest 2]: So I'll give you a small number, which will show you how lopsided the thing is.
[Guest 2]: The total number of foreign students who are studying in other countries in 2017 was 5
[Guest 2]: million.
[Guest 2]: In India, there are only about 48-49,000 foreign students, which is less than 1% of the number.
[Guest 2]: As opposed to that, Indian students studying abroad are about 3 lakh.
[Guest 2]: So it's massive because that's about close to 6%.
[Guest 1]: And that tells you something about our education system also.
[Guest 2]: We are very, very fine with our students going to other countries and, you know, making a
[Guest 2]: name for themselves.
[Guest 2]: I mean, there is an Indian in the US who's standing for some local election, we'll just
[Guest 2]: beat our chest and say, Oh, look, there's an Indian connection who's standing for some
[Guest 2]: US election, etc.
[Guest 2]: But when it comes to them coming here, we have all these long pages of restrictions
[Guest 2]: and no, you cannot do this, you cannot do that.
[Guest 2]: But why?
[Guest 2]: I mean, why can't we just open up and say, fine, come here, get a degree, get a job and
[Guest 2]: become Indian, get an Indian citizenship.
[Guest 2]: So I absolutely don't understand why we haven't done it.
[Guest 3]: And I think that's something that we should definitely do.
[Guest 3]: I think I'll have to rephrase what I said in the sense that, you know, when you're leaving
[Guest 3]: the country in this day and age with Vijay Mallya and Nirav Modi, yes, I mean, I guess
[Guest 3]: we have to be careful.
[Guest 1]: Let's move on now.
[Guest 1]: And Pranay Roy apparently also is on that list, because he was stopped at the airport
[Guest 1]: the other day.
[Amit Varma]: There you go.
[Guest 3]: No, but these guys are not on the list, which is why they left.
[Guest 1]: No, they were on the list.
[Guest 1]: We knew when they were leaving, so we could look the other way.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on now to reform number eight.
[Amit Varma]: And it's my turn again.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a pet reform.
[Amit Varma]: And it's actually a reform I feel really, really strongly about.
[Amit Varma]: And the reform very simply is abolish family planning.
[Amit Varma]: I think population control is one of the absolute worst ideas of modern India.
[Amit Varma]: And this is at two levels.
[Amit Varma]: It's at what I would say a consequential level and a deontological level.
[Amit Varma]: Let me explain both.
[Amit Varma]: One, there is this kind of zero sum thinking where, started, of course, famously by Malthus
[Amit Varma]: and now called Malthusian, where the sense is that there are only so many natural resources,
[Amit Varma]: we are going to run out of them if there are too many people.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, we have to do population control.
[Amit Varma]: And what this completely ignores, and this has been proven completely false over the
[Amit Varma]: centuries, but the myth still persists.
[Amit Varma]: And what this completely ignores is that human beings are, in the words of the economist
[Amit Varma]: Julian Simon, the ultimate resource.
[Amit Varma]: And what typically happens is that the more the population density anywhere, the greater
[Amit Varma]: the prosperity that you're likely to see.
[Amit Varma]: You see this at the level of countries where you have countries like Bahrain and Monaco,
[Amit Varma]: which have far greater population density than say Bangladesh or India.
[Amit Varma]: You see this within any country, where the most prosperous parts of a country are those
[Amit Varma]: parts with the greatest population density, which is why cities are the richest parts
[Amit Varma]: of any country and the history of humankind is a history of urbanization.
[Amit Varma]: People move from less populated areas to more populated areas because you get the chance
[Amit Varma]: to be part of larger economic networks with all the benefits of specialization and division
[Amit Varma]: of labor that entails and also because people are, you know, to quote Simon again, the ultimate
[Amit Varma]: resource.
[Amit Varma]: So with our ingenuity, we get over any possible shortfall of natural resources that happens.
[Amit Varma]: And this also kind of plays to the point that Rajeshwari made about immigration, where people
[Amit Varma]: might well ask that why should you let people in on a work visa when, as we discussed earlier
[Amit Varma]: in this episode, there is such a massive jobs crisis.
[Amit Varma]: And my sense is no, the thing is that the more people there are, the better we will
[Amit Varma]: do.
[Amit Varma]: One of the problems that we currently have, which seems to be because of too many people
[Amit Varma]: are problems of bad governance.
[Amit Varma]: Many of the reforms that we've suggested play exactly to that bad governance, bad incentives,
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: If people were a problem, people would not be moving from rural areas to cities.
[Amit Varma]: And we would not be constantly logically, rationally urbanizing.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, if you're listening this and you live in a city, you've actually, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense voted with your feet or by being where you are.
[Amit Varma]: My second more important point, and this makes me really angry, the moral point, the deontological
[Amit Varma]: point is that our bodies do not belong to the state.
[Amit Varma]: We are all individuals, the job of the state should be to protect our bodies, not to tell
[Amit Varma]: us how many children we may or may not have.
[Amit Varma]: I, of course, have chosen, we have chosen not to have any, but that's a different matter.
[Amit Varma]: That choice is something that should be made by all individuals.
[Amit Varma]: And to me, it is shock.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not just, you know, I'm not just outraged by the kind of coercive family planning and
[Amit Varma]: the Nazbandis carried out by that monster Sanjay Gandhi during the emergency and his
[Amit Varma]: equally monstrous mother, the kind of policies they put in place.
[Amit Varma]: Family planning still exists in India today.
[Amit Varma]: The Ministry of Health still incentivizes local level workers to, you know, still today
[Amit Varma]: to carry out Nazbandis and to carry out sterilizations.
[Amit Varma]: And the state is giving incentives to coerce people or to, you know, for people often to
[Amit Varma]: themselves going and it's always, again, the women who are at the receiving end of this.
[Amit Varma]: Very rarely will you find that the man is actually going to a clinic and saying, chalo
[Amit Varma]: Nazbandi karwa do.
[Amit Varma]: It's the women with whom it's a problem.
[Amit Varma]: So these are the two problems I have, consequential and moral.
[Amit Varma]: I think Vivek raised this.
[Guest 1]: I have a frivolous point.
[Guest 1]: I think this comes from a more fundamental misunderstanding of the world we live in.
[Guest 1]: You know, economists would always tell you that resources are scarce, but resources are
[Guest 1]: scarce.
[Guest 1]: They're not fixed.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: And the resources aren't fixed because of human ingenuity.
[Guest 1]: Now, look at a city like Bombay.
[Guest 1]: You have a fixed piece of land in the sense that, you know, there's only so much land.
[Guest 1]: It's a peninsula and there's water surrounding it.
[Guest 1]: Right, because of human ingenuity on things like concrete, right, or elevators, elevators,
[Guest 1]: according to me, are the best mass transit system, right?
[Guest 1]: Because you can go up so many floors in a matter of seconds.
[Guest 1]: And so that didn't come because that resource existed.
[Guest 1]: Human beings had to make that resource, right?
[Guest 1]: And it existed only in a world where the size of the market was large enough to allow that
[Guest 1]: kind of division of labor and specialization.
[Guest 1]: So what we need in the world is more people, more prosperous people, more productive people.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: This idea that Bombay has fixed amount of land.
[Guest 1]: I hear this all the time in Bombay.
[Guest 1]: We have a fixed amount of land.
[Guest 1]: There's only so much road.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: But our transit system is not the road alone.
[Guest 2]: Our transit system is also the phone.
[Guest 2]: And actually, contrary to perception, India has a lot of land.
[Guest 1]: Land is not a problem.
[Guest 1]: No, but in Bombay, you'll see, right?
[Amit Varma]: Like there's nowhere to expand.
[Amit Varma]: Digression, digression.
[Guest 1]: But it's not about the land alone.
[Guest 1]: I mean, there are only seven musical notes.
[Guest 1]: And yet we manage to produce more and more tunes.
[Guest 1]: So the idea is there is human beings are the resource.
[Guest 1]: Why?
[Guest 1]: Because their skill and productivity is the resource.
[Guest 1]: So the resources are finite as long as human beings and the ingenuity is finite, which
[Guest 1]: thankfully it is not.
[Unknown]: Right.
[Guest 1]: So it comes from a planning control mindset that resources are fixed, right?
[Guest 1]: Because there is no incentive for those people to innovate on how you use those resources.
[Guest 1]: So this is a really big problem.
[Guest 1]: So if you look at like Paul Romer and all the new, you know, endogenous growth theory
[Guest 1]: and so on and so forth.
[Guest 1]: Earlier, there was this idea that growth is a function of some lever you pull, right?
[Guest 1]: Some exogenous shock will happen.
[Guest 1]: You'll get this spurt of growth and that'll, you know, there'll be some spillover effect
[Guest 1]: and that's it.
[Guest 1]: But what you talked about cities, cities are endogenous growth engines, right?
[Guest 1]: There is growth because of something inherent that is happening when a lot of people mingle
[Guest 1]: with each other in a small physical space or a small intellectual space.
[Guest 1]: So and as you pointed out, most of us choose to live in dense places because that's where
[Guest 1]: the opportunities are.
[Guest 1]: So this is, you know, part of the problem.
[Guest 1]: The other part of the problem is we are very poor on service delivery.
[Guest 1]: So the metaphor for the Indian citizen when it comes to life is standing in line, right?
[Guest 1]: That is really the life of the common man.
[Guest 1]: So when you're standing in line, you blame everyone who's standing in front of you.
[Guest 1]: That's really the problem.
[Guest 1]: So this mindset comes for the state from one place, it manifests in the citizen from a
[Guest 1]: completely different place because we have just failed to provide the basic services
[Guest 1]: that you need, right?
[Guest 1]: The elevator was not provided by the state and the buses the state doesn't provide.
[Amit Varma]: So that's the problem.
[Amit Varma]: And to quickly add to that before we sort of go on is what also strikes me about population
[Amit Varma]: is that anyone who complains about the population being a problem is basically saying other
[Amit Varma]: people are the problem.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You know, they are also part of the population.
[Amit Varma]: And if you ask any one individual, are you a net cost to society or a net benefit?
[Amit Varma]: Are you giving more than you're taking out?
[Amit Varma]: I think everybody would say that no, I should be the one.
[Amit Varma]: But somehow, other people are the problem and they think other people are the problem
[Guest 1]: because of this constraint on public service delivery by the resources for which bad governance
[Guest 2]: is a problem.
[Guest 2]: Exactly.
[Guest 2]: Bad governance is the problem.
[Guest 2]: And of course, I mean, the way I see it is it's it's an escapism by the government, right?
[Guest 2]: So the government is saying, oh, we have failed to do our job of providing public goods and
[Unknown]: services.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, I'm going to just push the burden on you.
[Guest 2]: It's your responsibility to solve the problem by not having kids.
[Guest 2]: Now, one thing that I want to point out here is one country that tried this for a very
[Guest 2]: long period of time was, of course, China and the negative consequences of that, the
[Guest 2]: side effect that happened was actually and I've seen that happen in the US with my friends
[Guest 2]: is the Chinese.
[Guest 2]: They obviously they moved in large numbers to the US.
[Guest 2]: And once in the US, they actually started having kids there.
[Guest 2]: So I actually have friends who have so their parents had one kid in China and they have
[Guest 2]: actually moved to the US to have another kid.
[Guest 2]: And then they have taken the entire family back in the US.
[Guest 2]: And there is this brain drain that's happening from China because the Chinese government
[Guest 2]: has imposed this control.
[Guest 2]: So every time we bring a draconian measure like this, we should be very aware of the
[Guest 2]: consequence that it's going to happen because people are not going to be subservient and
[Guest 2]: say, oh, we are going to listen to it, people will find ways around it.
[Guest 2]: And the ways around it are not going to be good for the economy in the society in the
[Guest 1]: long run.
[Guest 1]: I want to add one more thing to this, Rukmini has just had a piece on how population control
[Unknown]: is tightly linked to female foeticide, right?
[Guest 1]: So this is just, you know, since you're talking about these unintended and perverse consequences,
[Guest 1]: I don't agree with population control for any reason.
[Guest 1]: But one of the terrible consequences of that is gender selection prenatally.
[Guest 2]: I mean, in terms of dense population, I mean, one example that I can think of is Hong Kong.
[Guest 2]: It's one of it's the highest population density in the world.
[Guest 2]: And if you go to Hong Kong, do you feel that there are no public good services because
[Guest 2]: there are many people absolutely not go to Tokyo, there are people standing in lines
[Guest 2]: to get into the metro in Tokyo, but then are we going to say there's no public goods and
[Guest 2]: services?
[Guest 2]: Absolutely not.
[Guest 2]: So it's a sham that we create that because we are a densely populated country, therefore,
[Amit Varma]: we are poor, and therefore, we don't have public goods and services.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great point.
[Guest 1]: It's a state blaming the society for its own failures.
[Guest 1]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: For existing.
[Guest 3]: So the first point I wanted to make was about land.
[Guest 3]: So, you know, in Mumbai, the problem is obviously the low FSI and low FSI is where all the state
[Guest 3]: government politicians
[Guest 3]: I mean, I don't know if many people would know that the government of India also manufactures
[Guest 3]: condoms, right?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, why?
[Amit Varma]: And sex toys.
[Amit Varma]: So, yeah, okay.
[Amit Varma]: No, it literally does.
[Amit Varma]: Obviously, you know, Pavan Srinath and I were just once sort of researching into this back
[Guest 1]: in the days of Pragat.
[Guest 1]: I don't know if I'm more aghast that they do it or you have this information.
[Guest 3]: I have this information because I care about good governance.
[Guest 3]: No.
[Guest 3]: So the funny point is, you know, people know that the government manufactures Nirodh, but
[Guest 3]: they don't know that the government also manufactures Mood condoms.
[Guest 3]: So which is, so every time you're using, you know, Mood condoms, you're basically using
[Guest 3]: a product manufactured by a company which belongs to the government of India.
[Amit Varma]: This is like the same guy owning a sweet shop and a gym side by side.
[Guest 2]: When I listen to these things, I get the feeling that we are literally, literally dreaming
[Guest 2]: here because when we are in a country like this, where the government is doing everything
[Guest 1]: possible and we're talking about markets and private enterprise.
[Guest 1]: Maybe the population is out of control because of the government condoms, I mean, everything
[Unknown]: else they produce is such poor quality.
[Unknown]: I would not.
[Guest 1]: I mean, this is a PSA announcement from Vivek.
[Unknown]: He's telling you the brands, so no, you don't use them.
[Guest 3]: Don't fly Air India and don't use Mood.
[Guest 3]: No, I fly Air India all the time.
[Guest 3]: Best seats, 25 kg luggage allowed.
[Guest 3]: I get scolded by the air hostesses when I ask for something.
[Guest 3]: And my best part is that at least I'm putting my tax money to some good use.
[Guest 3]: Because that is what is being used to rescue the airline.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, they've asked for 2000 crores.
[Amit Varma]: That's a sunk cost fallacy.
[Guest 3]: You're throwing good money after bad.
[Guest 3]: We have done episodes on this for other shows not yet released.
[Guest 3]: No, but then see, if I have the choice, if the price between an Indigo and an Air India
[Guest 2]: is the same, why would I travel to Indigo?
[Guest 2]: Vivek is the guy who's enabling the fat cat government.
[Amit Varma]: No, he's not, because they're not running on his ticket price.
[Guest 1]: They're running on our taxes.
[Guest 1]: He is benefiting from our unintended largesse.
[Guest 3]: He's being subsidized for his 25 kgs.
[Guest 3]: I wanted to make a point about the unintended consequence of female petricide.
[Guest 3]: I mean, or for the fact that what the one child policy in China now, I mean, a lot of
[Guest 3]: Chinese men are not finding brides because of or look at what has happened in Haryana,
[Guest 3]: which has had a very low, you know, male, female, female, male ratio, and they import
[Guest 3]: brides from I read a story in India today, at least two decades back, about how Haryanvi
[Guest 3]: men are importing Malayali brides because Kerala has, you know, more women than men.
[Guest 1]: First, they're sharing them and literally treating them like sex slaves.
[Amit Varma]: So in a household, if there are three brothers, they will share a bride.
[Amit Varma]: Haryana was, by the way, mentioned in great detail in my fantastic episode with Namita
[Amit Varma]: Bhandare.
[Guest 3]: If you guys heard this movie I saw many years back, I don't recall the name very, very disturbing
[Guest 3]: start Piyush Mishra.
[Guest 3]: It was about this village where they had run out of women.
[Guest 3]: And one of the brother, it was a story of some seven brothers, I think, or six or and
[Guest 3]: one of the brothers went, you know, finally figures out that, you know, there's this woman
[Guest 3]: who's available and, and she's ready to get married and he goes and turns out that, you
[Guest 3]: know, she's not a woman, she's a man.
[Guest 3]: So.
[Amit Varma]: Interesting.
[Guest 3]: What was the name of the movie?
[Guest 3]: Matru Bhoomi.
[Guest 3]: Very, very disturbing.
[Guest 3]: Start Piyush Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: That's how I remember it.
[Amit Varma]: Let's now move on to our ninth reform.
[Guest 1]: And back to miss Shruti Rajagopalan.
[Guest 1]: I would say, you know, I, I don't know if this is, I inadvertently ended up picking
[Guest 1]: up reforms that sort of benefit or affect the largest number possible.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: So, so that's where I was going with the, with the dreaming and the big thing.
[Guest 1]: And I think the big one we need to solve is law and order.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: And law and order has multiple parts to it.
[Guest 1]: You know, we need a fixed prison system, we need to fix courts and things like that.
[Guest 1]: But I think at the very least, even before we improve quality and do police reform, judicial
[Guest 1]: reform, I think one way to stimulate the economy with all this government spending is just
[Guest 1]: triple the police force.
[Guest 1]: Just triple the number of courts, triple the number of judges, right?
[Guest 1]: Triple our entire law enforcement structure.
[Guest 1]: Now I'm going to get trolled heavily for this because anytime I suggest adding to government,
[Guest 1]: someone calls me and asks me to throw my non-existent libertarian card in the Ganges, which is dirty.
[Amit Varma]: No, but I think libertarians like you and I kind of agree on one thing that what we
[Amit Varma]: need is a small and strong government that does its limited job well, and not a large
[Amit Varma]: and weak government as we have now.
[Amit Varma]: And law and order falls within that.
[Guest 1]: Exactly.
[Guest 1]: So one is, no, but there are, you know, speaking of the unintended consequences, so what's
[Guest 1]: ended up happening in India is we keep passing laws as a substitute for enforcement, right?
[Guest 1]: So the number of rapes are on the rise, right?
[Guest 1]: We don't know what to do about it.
[Guest 1]: There is some moral and public outrage.
[Guest 1]: So we pass a law that will, you know, change the juvenile rape to a normal rape law, or
[Guest 1]: we will change, you know, regular penalty to death penalty and so on and so forth.
[Guest 1]: But that's only one part, right?
[Guest 1]: Now making it death penalty doesn't mean it's being enforced more.
[Guest 1]: So the women are being raped as much or as little as they were before you pass this law,
[Guest 1]: because no one, forget rape, you don't get called into question or even get a slap on
[Guest 1]: the wrist for anything, groping, molesting, leering.
[Guest 1]: Every woman I know has experienced someone, you know, flashing her and groping her and
[Guest 1]: so on.
[Guest 1]: And this is not just about women.
[Guest 1]: It's about everyone, right?
[Guest 1]: So when you have very poor law enforcement, one of the consequences of that is there is
[Guest 1]: selective enforcement, right?
[Guest 1]: And the police must decide what is the most important case at hand.
[Guest 1]: Now when you can choose, you obviously, there is some politics involved in what are we choosing
[Guest 1]: to enforce in society, right?
[Guest 1]: So if you notice, it is always the disenfranchised who get harassed the most.
[Guest 1]: So there used to be a section 377.
[Guest 1]: It was never enforced, but it was used as, you know, the Matunga.
[Amit Varma]: I wrote a column called the Matunga racket.
[Guest 1]: And this is basically, they're just harassing young same sex couples by threatening to out
[Guest 1]: them or take them to their parents or take their photographs and you know, so on so forth.
[Guest 1]: The same thing happens when it comes to political issues, right?
[Guest 1]: You selectively enforce what you're going to do.
[Guest 1]: So the selective enforcement allows the government to use the police as a tool to punish any
[Guest 1]: opponents.
[Guest 1]: That's one very poor unintended consequence, or maybe an intended consequence of having
[Guest 1]: weak law enforcement.
[Guest 1]: That's what you see in India.
[Guest 1]: And now with this whole nationalist movement on the rise, people keep complaining that
[Guest 1]: you know, why are these people who are lynching going free and not getting, well, it's basically
[Guest 1]: because our entire law enforcement system is completely broken.
[Guest 1]: We have no chain of custody when it comes to evidence that requires people, it requires,
[Guest 1]: it literally requires more hands on deck and manpower, right?
[Guest 1]: Requires labs, it requires infrastructure.
[Guest 1]: So one part of it is, of course, as a society, we're choosing to look the other way.
[Guest 1]: But even if you have good people in a system that's broken, and is like just barely functioning,
[Guest 1]: you're going to get consequences like Bailu Khan, right?
[Guest 1]: So I think the big one we need to solve is law and order.
[Guest 1]: And I think the first step towards solving that is just more hands on deck.
[Guest 1]: I know some of the laws they will enforce are terrible, but we still just need more
[Guest 1]: law enforcement.
[Guest 1]: We need more constables, more traffic police, you know, just the, we really need to increase
[Guest 2]: that number right now.
[Guest 2]: So one question that I have there, Shruti, and you'll obviously know much more on this
[Guest 2]: than I do, which is that, isn't it the case and that there's research that shows that
[Guest 2]: just by increasing the number of courts and judges is really not going to solve the problem
[Guest 2]: of the judiciary?
[Guest 2]: Because it's not that we have a problem of a broken judiciary, because we don't have
[Guest 2]: enough judges and courts.
[Guest 1]: No, we do.
[Guest 1]: The problem lies somewhere else.
[Guest 1]: No, that is.
[Guest 1]: But that's a big part of the problem, right?
[Guest 1]: Pendency rates are incredibly high and judicial workloads are very high for two reasons.
[Guest 1]: One, we don't have enough judges and courts.
[Guest 1]: And two, the vacancies are staggering right now.
[Amit Varma]: You know,
[Amit Varma]: But can I add to a question?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, just to add to a question, there seem to be two problems here.
[Amit Varma]: One is state capacity, not enough cops.
[Amit Varma]: And the other is wrong incentives for the state capacity that does exist, which is why
[Amit Varma]: so many policemen are into rent seeking, for example, they will stand at signals and wait
[Amit Varma]: to catch somebody.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you can increase the state capacity, but the bad incentives are still in place.
[Guest 1]: Yes.
[Guest 1]: So I don't claim that just increasing the law enforcement will solve the entire criminal
[Guest 1]: justice system.
[Guest 1]: But I do think it helps to have more police on the streets or in the metro or at the train
[Guest 1]: station to prevent basic things like right now, the system we've devolved into in India
[Guest 1]: is no one's even reporting a mugging.
[Guest 1]: The only time you report a theft is because you need an FIR to get a new driver's license,
[Guest 1]: right?
[Guest 1]: Or to, you know, give it to the credit card company to get out of fraud or something like
[Guest 1]: that.
[Guest 1]: So one of the consequences of just not having hands on deck is extreme underreporting.
[Guest 1]: Because you have no one to report to and no one's willing to write the report.
[Guest 1]: Or there's just no one present, right?
[Guest 1]: Which means all your small offenses.
[Guest 1]: And when I say small, I mean, minor in terms of both punishment and how society views them.
[Guest 1]: They just go underreported.
[Guest 1]: So it looks like society doesn't have these problems, but the deadweight loss is somewhere
[Guest 1]: else.
[Guest 1]: You know, people don't carry as much money as they would like to carry, right?
[Guest 1]: People don't carry gold when they travel across cities to go to a wedding or something like
[Guest 1]: that, because everyone's nervous, right?
[Guest 1]: You don't go out late at night, you don't go to watch a movie, you don't take a job
[Guest 1]: that's going to require late hours.
[Guest 1]: You don't go to a university that's too far, right?
[Guest 1]: So this is how it compounds.
[Guest 1]: So will just having more police solve all problems?
[Guest 1]: No.
[Guest 1]: Will having more judges will go a much longer way in solving problems than more police.
[Guest 1]: With police, there is also a fear that unless we fix the pernicious regulation, this could
[Guest 1]: also manifest into an exercise where police has more control.
[Guest 1]: But I think at this point, given how lawless our society is, I think this tradeoff, I think
[Amit Varma]: would be reasonable.
[Amit Varma]: I guess what you're saying is more state capacity is necessary, but not sufficient.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, it's absolutely necessary.
[Guest 1]: And it could have some other unintended issues also.
[Guest 1]: But I really think we need to go towards this because we are just living, you know, some
[Guest 1]: parts it's just anarchy the bad way, like, you know, the, it's just gundaraj going on
[Guest 3]: in lots of towns and villages in India.
[Guest 3]: So, you know, one of the things I realized, so there is, I have a chapter on this in my
[Guest 3]: India's big government book.
[Guest 3]: So if you look at the pending cases, so one point is that what kind of cases are pending,
[Guest 3]: okay.
[Guest 3]: And very, very interestingly, a lot of cases which are pending have to do with vehicle
[Guest 3]: chalans.
[Guest 3]: Okay.
[Guest 3]: Now that is not something that needs to go on and on and on.
[Guest 3]: So all it needs is essentially a dedicated court, and you put in a few young guys, it's
[Guest 3]: not like a complicated reading of the law that is required there, put in some recruit
[Guest 3]: a few more young judges, put them there.
[Guest 3]: And then, you know, you can tackle this problem at a very fast pace, you can do it by post.
[Guest 3]: Also, the second thing that is, you know, this is something that Shailesh Gandhi had
[Guest 3]: written a very interesting column on in the Times of India a few years back.
[Guest 3]: And what he said was that it's not like the courts are not doing any work, they're disposing
[Guest 3]: close to 2 crore cases a year, which is like a huge number.
[Guest 3]: But what is happening is that the number of cases that sort of new cases that come on
[Guest 3]: are more than that.
[Guest 3]: So essentially, you know, if you sort of let's say, you know, I mean, I remember this offhand,
[Guest 3]: so I may not be very sure of the numbers.
[Guest 3]: So like India has, I think, the number of judges that the high court judges, the number
[Guest 3]: of positions is around 1040 or something like that.
[Guest 3]: And the last time I checked, we had some 600 or something like that who were appointed
[Guest 3]: to those posts.
[Guest 3]: So the point is, even if we don't create extra posts, and we just appoint the number of,
[Guest 3]: you know, the posts that are already there, that in itself will take care of a large part
[Guest 3]: of the problem.
[Guest 3]: And one frivolous point, basically, the police thing, you know, when you want to, the fact
[Guest 3]: that more police may not solve the problem.
[Guest 3]: So there's this movie called China Gate many, many years back, which had, you know, the
[Guest 3]: villain was played by this guy called Mukesh Tiwari, it was his first movie.
[Guest 3]: And there's a line in the movie which said that ki hum se ladne ki taqat toh le aoge,
[Guest 3]: par hamara kameena pan kahan se laoge.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, so you can, which completely goes against everything we say about incentives,
[Amit Varma]: because level of kameena pan doesn't matter if incentives are right.
[Guest 3]: So the new, so I'll tell you, it's really bad, by the way.
[Guest 3]: So basically, what happened was that, you know, and I mean, if you, you know, in Mumbai
[Guest 3]: now they've started to send traffic fines via SMS.
[Guest 3]: So you basically log on to an app and pay off.
[Guest 3]: Now, what is happening is that, so you know, initially, when this happened, everyone was
[Guest 3]: like, okay, now these hawaldars won't be able to charge anything at all.
[Guest 3]: But what has happened is that the bribes have, in fact, instead of going down, have gone
[Guest 3]: up.
[Guest 3]: Now, so basically
[Amit Varma]: Because a hawaldar has less opportunity.
[Guest 3]: No, what is happening is, so when you get a fine, most people don't know that they've
[Guest 3]: got a fine.
[Guest 3]: Okay.
[Guest 3]: So let's say, during a random check, the hawaldar has his phone, he just has to sort,
[Guest 3]: he has some sort of an app, which he points towards your number plate, and he immediately
[Guest 3]: gets the fine outstanding.
[Guest 3]: So let's say you've driven through the sea link a few times, and instead of driving at
[Guest 3]: less than 80 kilometers, you've driven at 95, and you have a fine outstanding of 4000
[Guest 3]: bucks.
[Guest 3]: So the first thing you'll do is that, you know, we need to confiscate your vehicle and
[Guest 3]: shut it down.
[Guest 3]: And then you'll, he'll start at 500 bucks, and you know, you finally negotiate 200, 250,
[Guest 3]: and you go off.
[Guest 3]: And earlier, these hawaldars, you could have paid them 50 bucks and
[Amit Varma]: You don't even drive a car.
[Amit Varma]: How do you know this?
[Amit Varma]: I drive a car.
[Guest 3]: Because I talk to all these cab, you know, cab guys that I
[Amit Varma]: The journalist who talks to the cabbie.
[Guest 3]: The best thing is, you should, you should now drive through the JJ flyover, okay?
[Guest 3]: So the JJ flyover speed limit is now 30 kilometers an hour.
[Guest 3]: So when you go there, and especially during the day when the traffic is not very heavy,
[Guest 3]: you actually feel that everything is in slow motion.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so once I was in fact on Worli sea link with our mutual friend Kumar, late at night,
[Amit Varma]: dropping him back home.
[Amit Varma]: And there was a car going at the speed limit, right?
[Amit Varma]: And we thought ki yeh kaun pagal hai, kya kar raha hai, speed limit pe chal raha hai.
[Amit Varma]: So what I did was, as I passed him, I slowed down to go at his pace so we could look inside.
[Amit Varma]: And the driver was drinking a cup of coffee, he has a cup of coffee in his hand.
[Guest 3]: So these days, if you are on the sea link, and you see any car going above 80, you would
[Guest 3]: know that it is a non-Maharashtra or a non-Mumbai car, a number at least.
[Guest 3]: So because they don't know.
[Guest 3]: I go at whatever speed I want, I should check the app, I think.
[Guest 3]: You should, tumhara hoga hai.
[Guest 3]: So one driver told me about his friend that, you know, his friend had a fine of some 22,000
[Guest 3]: rupees.
[Guest 1]: And so because people don't know, so I mean, this is the funny thing.
[Guest 1]: Have you guys ever been in a car with Amit?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, why?
[Guest 1]: He thinks traffic signals are a suggestion.
[Guest 1]: Well, it's, let us just say, he takes his libertarianism to this extreme.
[Amit Varma]: Let me just say that Haidt spoke of emergent order and in a country with no rule of law,
[Amit Varma]: sometimes you just follow the emergent order.
[Unknown]: I have never been so terrified for my life.
[Guest 3]: I'll give you some research in support of your point.
[Guest 3]: So I think in some town in Holland, one of the Scandinavian countries, I mean, I'm not
[Guest 3]: sure whether it was Holland, they decided that they'll do away with traffic lights.
[Guest 3]: And they did away with traffic lights.
[Guest 3]: And the accident rates, in fact, came down.
[Guest 3]: Because now, you know, everyone was driving even more carefully to ensure that they don't
[Guest 3]: that's interesting.
[Amit Varma]: But I have to say, I mean, I'm not that extreme.
[Guest 3]: I do believe in traffic lights and for all my listeners is a great all your you know,
[Guest 3]: the fact that you're libertarian.
[Amit Varma]: So maybe for all my listeners is a great book called Traffic by Tom Vanderbilt.
[Amit Varma]: Check that out.
[Amit Varma]: Lots of interesting insights such as the majority of accidents tend to happen when you're close
[Amit Varma]: to home, which is very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't know that.
[Amit Varma]: So you go on a long journey, but the accident probably won't happen throughout the journey.
[Amit Varma]: But just when you're about to get home, possibly because you let your guard down, let's move
[Guest 3]: on.
[Amit Varma]: So when you don't know where you're going, so we do know where we are going.
[Amit Varma]: We are now moving on to reform number 11.
[Guest 1]: Okay, which is 1010 which is 1010 not 11.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the counting doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Like you famously said, forget fiscal federalism, we can't count.
[Amit Varma]: That's like the quote of the episode, right?
[Guest 1]: It's nice.
[Guest 1]: Absolutely.
[Guest 3]: I'm sure Vivek will come up with something better.
[Guest 3]: No, I will come up with something better, but it will only be borrowed.
[Guest 3]: It won't be original.
[Guest 3]: And kindly give reason.
[Guest 3]: So no, I mean, the final, the third thing I wanted to talk about is basically India's
[Guest 3]: big government, on which I have, I wrote a 800 page tome.
[Guest 1]: It's a very fine book.
[Guest 3]: One of my friends called it very recently, you know, we were talking that, you know,
[Guest 3]: I'm writing this new book and all that and he said, Kripya, is bar hati ka bacha nahi
[Amit Varma]: likhiyega.
[Amit Varma]: It's less of a book and more of a murder weapon.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if you eventually write crime fiction as friends like me persuade you to do so,
[Amit Varma]: your own book can feature as a murder weapon in the book.
[Guest 1]: The print in that book is really small.
[Guest 1]: I have to point out.
[Amit Varma]: It's small.
[Amit Varma]: But let us not intimidate readers.
[Guest 1]: It's just a large book, but it's very well written.
[Unknown]: It's a page turner.
[Guest 3]: I strongly recommend.
[Guest 3]: It has some great, hilarious examples, which is why I'm the only one who's read it.
[Guest 3]: What I'm trying to say is that the key theme in the book is that India has a big government,
[Guest 3]: but not in terms of the number of people it employs, but in terms of what it hopes to
[Guest 3]: achieve.
[Guest 3]: I mean, or, you know, the technical term of, you know, for which is state capacity, as
[Guest 3]: we say.
[Guest 3]: So I think, you know, we need to sort of I mean, because we're talking about dream reforms
[Guest 3]: here.
[Guest 3]: So my dream is that the Indian government will get out of, you know, most of the things
[Guest 3]: that it does and concentrate on five, six things, you know, defense, external affairs,
[Guest 3]: agriculture, probably education, and so on and so forth, and health and not try to run
[Guest 3]: Air India or Hindustan Photo Films for that matter.
[Guest 3]: So manufacture sex toys, manufacture condoms, or, in fact, we even manufacture six-seaters.
[Guest 3]: So there are seven-seaters.
[Guest 3]: We have a company, we as taxpayers own a company called Hindustan Scooters Limited, which once
[Guest 3]: upon a time used to produce the Vijay Super, and given that they don't produce the Vijay
[Guest 3]: Super anymore, but what they produce is a seven-seater called Vikram.
[Guest 3]: If you've, you know, ever traveled through this, you know, streets.
[Guest 2]: See, the government is contradicting itself.
[Guest 3]: On one hand, you're encouraging family planning, on the other hand, you're manufacturing seven-seaters.
[Guest 3]: So yeah, so the government should sort of get out of all these things.
[Guest 3]: I mean, like, you know, even before I came here, I was reading, you know, the news, in
[Guest 3]: the newspaper today, there was this news about how Air India has asked, you know, the government
[Guest 3]: again for money, you know, some 2,000 odd crores.
[Guest 3]: Now, I mean, it's not, I mean, why should a government be running an airline?
[Guest 3]: I mean, nowhere in the world does, at least not in the developed world, maybe in the developing
[Guest 3]: world, they still do.
[Guest 3]: So the government should not be running an airline.
[Guest 3]: The government should not be making condoms.
[Guest 3]: The government should not be making seven-seaters.
[Guest 3]: The government should be, I mean, as far as banking is concerned, I think that, you know,
[Guest 3]: if they want to be in banking, they should probably run five, six big banks, and then
[Guest 3]: just sell off the, or just shut it down.
[Guest 3]: I mean, you know, if a bank like Indian Overseas Bank shuts down, nothing is going to happen
[Guest 3]: to the state of the Indian economy.
[Guest 3]: I mean, or if you look at a bank like Bank of Maharashtra, I mean, it could possibly
[Guest 3]: concentrate on the state of Maharashtra, where it has, you know, extensive presence.
[Guest 3]: There's no point of, you know, Bank of Maharashtra opening a branch in Assam.
[Guest 3]: It just doesn't make any sense.
[Guest 3]: Or look at the Jammu and Kashmir Bank.
[Guest 3]: By far the best example, Jammu and Kashmir Bank is not a, it's not a nationalized bank.
[Guest 3]: It has branches in the state of Jammu and Kashmir, has access to, you know, a lot of
[Guest 3]: deposits, and then, you know, it lends that money.
[Guest 3]: So you need that kind of model, like Dena Bank, once upon a time, used to be pretty
[Guest 3]: good at trade finance.
[Guest 3]: So it could have specialized and continued to be in that space instead of being, you
[Guest 3]: know, merged away with Bank of Baroda, so as to hide its bad loans rate, very, very
[Guest 3]: high bad loans rate of 22%.
[Guest 3]: So all this merger-sharjah is basically, again, you know, it's essentially trying to hide
[Guest 3]: the bad loans of the bad banks, and it's not going to help in any way.
[Guest 3]: Like when is State Bank of India, I mean, by far the best example, before the merger
[Guest 3]: with its five associate banks and Bharatiya Mahila Bank, had a bad loans rate of something
[Guest 3]: around 7.2% or something.
[Guest 3]: And after the merger, the rate increased to 10%, because all these banks came up with
[Guest 3]: their bad loans.
[Guest 3]: So State Bank essentially cleaned up its book, and then had to start cleaning it all over
[Amit Varma]: again.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's still in the red.
[Amit Varma]: Since you were mentioning bad loans, a bad joke, which is that if there is a bank called
[Guest 3]: Dena Bank, should there not be a collection agency called Vapas Lena Collection Agency
[Guest 3]: anyway?
[Amit Varma]: Lena Bank.
[Guest 3]: Moving on.
[Guest 3]: Yeah.
[Guest 3]: So I mean, I think, again, I mean, this is this is a dream thing.
[Guest 3]: So the government should restrict its ambitions and, you know, get and but I said this will
[Guest 3]: not be possible because, you know, every PSU reports to a government ministry and which
[Guest 3]: is what gives them the importance that they have.
[Guest 3]: I mean, so something like, if you take away Air India, you don't require the Ministry
[Guest 3]: of Civil Aviation.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, that's what I was about to say that I think your instincts are all in the
[Amit Varma]: right direction.
[Amit Varma]: But they do not go far enough.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you named more ministries than I would have as being justified.
[Amit Varma]: And you said ki chhe saath bank toh rehne chahiye.
[Guest 3]: No, in the sense, no, what I'm trying to say is that see, my, you know, over the years,
[Guest 3]: what I've realized is that there is, there is there is economics, which is right, which
[Guest 3]: is the right thing to do.
[Guest 3]: And then there are then there is economics, which is saleable, feasible, yeah, but we're
[Guest 3]: dreaming now, you know, talking.
[Guest 3]: So no, so I'm saying the good thing to do is to get out of everything.
[Guest 3]: But then if that's not possible, let's say you want to meet your social targets, and
[Guest 3]: you want people to open Jan Dhan accounts.
[Guest 3]: And by the way, talking about Jan Dhan accounts, there are some 36 crore Jan Dhan accounts
[Guest 3]: now, and India has 25 crore households.
[Guest 3]: So we have opened enough Jan Dhan accounts.
[Guest 3]: So you know, on an average, it's more than one per family, which is good enough.
[Guest 2]: So I have a point, which is sort of again, echoing what Amit said is, you know, since
[Guest 2]: we're in the dream world, if you if you allow the government to be in one field, the government
[Guest 2]: will not balance itself and say, we'll just open five banks and not open 25.
[Guest 2]: The government will basically want to go all out and grab all the power in that field and
[Guest 2]: say, okay, we are basically the Mahibab in this field.
[Guest 2]: So I think in that sense, it's a little bit of a black and white that if you really want
[Guest 2]: to shrink the size of the government, the government should be restricted to the five
[Guest 2]: or four basic functions of, of defense and law and order and etc, etc, and not be in
[Guest 2]: at all in banking, in hotels, opening tiffin canteens in Tamil Nadu, or whatever it is
[Guest 2]: they're doing nothing at all just define four basic functions that the government should
[Guest 2]: do.
[Guest 2]: And that also addresses all the other our previous points about fiscal responsibility
[Guest 2]: and doing education opening up to the private sector and all of this.
[Guest 2]: So I think the overarching thing is, I think we should agree that if you want to shrink
[Guest 2]: the size of the government, let's be serious and really shrink it to just four functions
[Guest 3]: and nothing else.
[Guest 3]: And the good part is, you know, there's another part to it that a lot of these PSUs are sitting
[Guest 3]: on a whole lot of land.
[Guest 3]: And a lot of this land is bang in the middle of because when these PSUs were established,
[Guest 3]: they were established outside the cities, but now, you know, the cities have grown around.
[Guest 3]: What is just government land, most of it right?
[Guest 3]: I grew up in this city called Ranchi and Ranchi has a lot of PSUs, but the biggest of them
[Guest 3]: all is the Heavy Engineering Corporation, which is located in this place called Dhruva
[Guest 3]: on the outskirts, or at least used to be on the outskirts, not anymore.
[Guest 3]: Now, the amount of land that company has is mind boggling, because there is a factory,
[Guest 3]: you know, which they manufacture things at one end, and then there's just, you know,
[Guest 3]: land everywhere, whereas the city of Ranchi has no land because the Tribal Act is in place.
[Guest 3]: So you have, you know, atrocious real estate prices.
[Guest 3]: But one part of the city has land, which is virtually free lying there, nothing's being
[Guest 3]: done.
[Guest 3]: And that's, that's been the case for years now.
[Guest 2]: So,
[Guest 2]: But you know, one example of that land point is the difficulties of liquidating this land,
[Guest 2]: so to speak, or then using it for private purposes, even if you let's say sell Air India.
[Guest 2]: So in Air India, specifically, I know this, that when the contracts were written to have
[Guest 2]: Air India big buildings, like we have in South Bombay, we have in Calcutta, we have in every
[Guest 2]: city, in fact, the contract actually specified that, okay, this land, whatever is being given
[Guest 2]: to Air India for constructing this Air India specific building, and it belongs to the government
[Guest 2]: of India.
[Guest 2]: And it can be sold to whoever subject to blah, blah, blah terms and conditions for exclusively
[Guest 2]: for other airline users.
[Guest 2]: Now the problem with that in today's world is today's airlines don't need buildings,
[Guest 2]: you know, you don't need this large 20 storied offices to set up an airline's office.
[Guest 2]: So now that Air India building, which is in South Bombay, it's completely useless, because
[Guest 2]: you can't really sell it, liquidate it for any value, because it can only be used for
[Guest 2]: another airline purpose, unless you change that entire contract and law, which is again,
[Guest 3]: very difficult.
[Guest 3]: So the other problem with this is that a lot of land was given by the state governments
[Guest 3]: to the central government.
[Guest 3]: So I think these this land, even if you can't sell it, it should go back to the state government,
[Guest 3]: let the state government decide what they want to do.
[Guest 3]: So like, which is precisely I think, something which is playing out with the Hindustan Photo
[Guest 3]: Films, which I think they finally managed to close down, or it is in the process, I'm
[Guest 3]: not sure.
[Guest 3]: So that land was given to the central government by the state government.
[Guest 3]: Now, Hindustan Photo Films is in Ooty, Ooty is a very good, you know, it's it's, you know,
[Guest 3]: people, it's a tourist destination, a lot of people go there.
[Guest 3]: So there's so many things that can actually be done with that land.
[Guest 3]: I mean, so let the state government decide what they want to do with it instead of the
[Guest 3]: central government sitting on it.
[Guest 1]: I would actually go back to the point on the banks thing, right, the bank nationalization,
[Guest 1]: and we really should be should not be in the business of banking.
[Guest 1]: And I agree, it's not about the number of banks, it's about credit control, right?
[Guest 1]: So one of the reasons that government likes to own so many banks, and how come government
[Guest 1]: banks have so many bad loans on the books, is because there's a whole political economy
[Guest 1]: aspect to it, right?
[Guest 1]: Politicians need campaign finance, right?
[Guest 1]: Campaign finance is given to them by these builders and all these industrialists, and
[Guest 1]: so on so forth.
[Guest 1]: This is the case of politicians who are not putting up their own money.
[Guest 1]: And in lieu of that, they say that, you know, they will get loans on favorable terms and
[Guest 1]: so on so forth.
[Guest 1]: So there is, it's not a coincidence that so many bad loans were approved for Vijay Mallya
[Guest 1]: or for Lalit Modi and these guys, right?
[Guest 1]: This is not an accident.
[Guest 3]: There is a reason...
[Guest 1]: Nirav Modi, you mean, not Lalit.
[Guest 1]: Sorry, Nirav Modi, exactly.
[Guest 1]: Well, that's another problem.
[Guest 1]: But yeah, Nirav Modi.
[Guest 1]: So there is an issue repeatedly, and this is really not, like, none of these are just
[Guest 1]: mistakes that the bank made.
[Guest 1]: You always, when you talk to the, you know, lower management in the banks, they're like,
[Guest 1]: haan, upar se order aaya tha, haan, upar se file aaya tha, right?
[Guest 1]: So that's one problem.
[Guest 1]: The other part of the problem is you want to control voters.
[Guest 1]: You cannot offer loan waivers unless you nationalize credit by nationalizing banks.
[Guest 1]: And we are an economy running on loan waivers for the last, like, what, 40 plus years, right?
[Guest 1]: Post Indira Gandhi, 50 years.
[Guest 1]: So there is, I mean, we're never going to see this day because there's a reason they
[Guest 3]: like to hold on to the control.
[Guest 3]: Loan waivers first started in 1989.
[Guest 3]: Devi Lal was the first one to write off, waive off a loan.
[Guest 3]: Usse pehle loan mela hota tha, wherein they used to give you the money.
[Guest 3]: Give you free loans.
[Guest 3]: Okay.
[Guest 1]: They used to give you the money.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: So you started the loan mela, which you would default and then, you know, which got absorbed
[Guest 1]: and then you have the loan waivers.
[Guest 1]: So now this is a really big problem in the sense that this is how you're buying off voters
[Guest 1]: who are in agricultural distress and, you know, you want to target specific sectors
[Guest 1]: of the economy.
[Guest 1]: So I think I'm here with Rajeshwari that you, I don't think they should own a single bank.
[Guest 1]: You know, it's not the proliferation of banks.
[Guest 1]: It's the, it's the bad incentives.
[Guest 1]: And it just so happens that, you know, there is a distribution and some of the banks are
[Guest 1]: slightly better than some of the banks are worse run or like more easy to manipulate,
[Guest 1]: but they really should not be in the business of banking.
[Guest 1]: And you know, there's NBFCs also, you guys have talked about it.
[Amit Varma]: I think there's business of, we've had episodes on NBFCs, NPAs, farm loan waivers, all of
[Guest 2]: this.
[Unknown]: Exactly.
[Unknown]: All of this.
[Guest 2]: So this is basically just listen to all the podcasts in Amit Verma's In an Unseen and
[Guest 2]: then we'll have a list of dream reforms just by itself.
[Guest 1]: That's it.
[Guest 1]: By itself.
[Guest 1]: No, we've already done that.
[Guest 3]: This is the summary, you don't have to spend so much time.
[Amit Varma]: No, no.
[Amit Varma]: I had to discuss the first 100 episodes.
[Amit Varma]: This is like saying that don't read Vivek's book, India's Big Government, sab toh bolta
[Unknown]: hai yahan pe.
[Unknown]: It's like saying that it's very rude.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, everyone should read it.
[Amit Varma]: It's very easy to read and not as big as it looks.
[Amit Varma]: I plugged it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So we have to move on now to Rajeshwari because she has to leave soon.
[Amit Varma]: So we will ask her to get her last thing over with.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, I'll quickly share an anecdote, if I may, about Devi Lal, since he was mentioned.
[Amit Varma]: You guys remember this video news magazine that used to come in the early nineties called
[Amit Varma]: News Track.
[Amit Varma]: There was once an interview of Devi Lal when he was a deputy prime minister and his son
[Amit Varma]: Om Prakash Chautala was chief minister of Haryana.
[Amit Varma]: So Devi Lal was asked and the camera angle was he's basically lying in a dhoti and a
[Amit Varma]: banyan on this charpai kind of thing.
[Amit Varma]: And the camera angle is from his, he's wearing keds.
[Amit Varma]: So it's his keds.
[Amit Varma]: So massive keds, small Devi Lal face in the background.
[Amit Varma]: And the question is, so Devi Lal ji, aapne apne bete ko CM kyu banaya?
[Amit Varma]: And Devi Lal said, toh kya Bhajan Lal ke chhore ko banao?
[Amit Varma]: Which basically says everything you need to know about politics today.
[Amit Varma]: Now let's Rajeshwari, you have 25 minutes left with us.
[Guest 2]: So kindly elucidate on your final dream reform.
[Guest 2]: Devi Lal and Bhajan Lal or whatever, that's like such an optimistic tone for dream reform.
[Amit Varma]: But this is the greatest answer I have ever heard in my life.
[Amit Varma]: Toh kya Bhajan Lal ke chhore ko banao?
[Amit Varma]: Who can argue with that?
[Guest 2]: Kindly continue.
[Guest 2]: Okay.
[Guest 2]: So my next and last reform is actually very, very narrow in scope and very specific.
[Guest 2]: But in a way it is tied to my first point about fiscal discipline.
[Guest 2]: And this is about, this is related to banking.
[Guest 2]: So I'm moving to the financial sector.
[Guest 2]: So now in India, what happens is banks and other financial institutions like insurance
[Guest 2]: funds and pension funds have to hold large amounts of government securities through what
[Guest 2]: we call statutory liquidity ratio.
[Guest 2]: That's the technical term.
[Guest 2]: And essentially this boils down to financial repression, because this is the captive market
[Guest 2]: that the government has access to.
[Guest 2]: And the government bonds are basically something that have to be bought by the banks and the
[Guest 2]: insurance companies.
[Guest 2]: And through that, the government keeps on maintaining a fiscal deficit and whatever
[Guest 2]: it is.
[Guest 2]: It makes it much easier.
[Guest 2]: And the sort of the lie that the policymakers also tell us, including the Reserve Bank of
[Guest 2]: India, is that this is not financial repression.
[Guest 2]: This is prudential regulation.
[Guest 2]: This is required for the safety of the banks.
[Guest 2]: And the banks need to hold on to safe assets, because that's just how the prudential regulation
[Guest 2]: works.
[Guest 2]: Now, what my reform is about is, I want to bust that myth, because this is not a safety
[Guest 2]: asset, because the Indian government bonds are not the safe assets.
[Guest 2]: Because if you look at Indian government credit rating internationally, it is borderline investment
[Guest 2]: grade and one step away from speculative grade.
[Guest 2]: So if we really want our banks to be safe and our financial institutions to be safe,
[Guest 2]: it is policy adventurism to tell them to hold government securities, Indian government securities.
[Guest 2]: And instead, if you really want them to hold liquid assets, they should be holding minimum
[Guest 2]: double A rated or more triple A rated assets of foreign governments, like international
[Guest 2]: assets, which have much higher rating, much higher credit rating and are actually safe
[Guest 2]: and liquid, because Indian government securities are not even liquid.
[Guest 2]: And there are also the additional risk that every time the interest rate goes up, the
[Guest 2]: banks are actually incurring losses.
[Guest 2]: So it cuts them multiple ways.
[Guest 2]: So instead of that, you reduce, and of course, if you are tying the hands of the government
[Guest 2]: in the fiscal discipline, which was my first point, you don't need to do this financial
[Guest 2]: repression of SLR, you cut down the SLR significantly, and for the safety purpose, the bank should
[Guest 2]: actually be holding foreign government assets, which are triple A rated.
[Guest 2]: And the reason I thought about this is also in the last 10 years, what has been happening
[Guest 2]: in Europe has been an eye opener, because of the sovereign debt crisis, the banking
[Guest 2]: sector in European countries has been really struggling, because the banks of Italy and
[Guest 2]: Greece were actually holding their own domestic government bonds.
[Guest 2]: And when the governments defaulted, when the governments went on the brink of a default,
[Guest 2]: these banks basically took a massive hit.
[Guest 2]: And this in economics is what we call home buyers.
[Guest 2]: And home buyers can really be very costly, because you are not diversifying your portfolio,
[Guest 2]: you're putting all your eggs in one basket.
[Guest 2]: And in India, as I said, it goes one step further, because it's financial repression,
[Guest 2]: because to that extent, banks are also not able to lend to the rest of the economy.
[Guest 2]: So you kill many birds with this one stone, if you say that, okay, banks will hold liquid
[Guest 2]: assets of foreign governments, which are triple A rated, and you reduce that SLR so that banks
[Guest 2]: have that much more money to lend out to the rest of the economy.
[Guest 2]: And you also take away that captive bond market from the government, which the government
[Guest 2]: very nicely and comfortably falls back on.
[Guest 2]: So that would be my third and last reform.
[Guest 3]: So I'd like to add a couple of points to what Rajeshwari said, I mean, I agree with her
[Guest 3]: completely.
[Guest 3]: And so the first thing here is that, you know, it's not like the RBI hasn't done anything
[Guest 3]: about it.
[Guest 3]: The SLR has been reduced from, you know, from what I remember from almost 38% to now it's
[Guest 3]: at 18.75.
[Guest 3]: But the bank's investment in government securities has not come down in a similar way.
[Guest 3]: So if you I mean, the last that I checked, a couple of months back, almost 27-28% of
[Guest 3]: the total liabilities that the banks have, were invested in government bonds, even though
[Guest 3]: you know, the number should have been around 19, 19 and a half percent.
[Guest 3]: So banks also like to do some lazy banking, wherein, you know, you just put in some money
[Guest 3]: there and our arms interest are high.
[Guest 3]: So that's, that's one point.
[Guest 3]: The second point is, you know, as far as the government is concerned, I mean, it obviously
[Guest 3]: is a very, very easy way for it to raise money.
[Guest 3]: And given that it is compulsory for banks to buy these bonds, the yield that the government
[Guest 3]: ends up paying on these bonds is extremely low, because, you know, if you start to factor
[Guest 3]: in, you know, typically how, you know, thumb rule to price a bond is, you know, you take
[Guest 3]: inflation and you take some risk premium, and you add it and you come at a basic rate.
[Guest 3]: So if you do that, I mean, then the bond yields would not be as low as they are, okay.
[Guest 3]: So obviously, you know, the bond yields would go up, interest rates would go up.
[Guest 3]: So there is a flip side to it as well.
[Guest 3]: But what will happen over a period of time is that because there is, you know, the access
[Guest 3]: to this easy money goes away, the chances of the government being more fiscally prudent
[Guest 3]: and fiscally disciplined will go up as well.
[Guest 2]: And also, Vivek, there is a conflict of interest inherent, which is happening in open eyes
[Guest 2]: and nobody points out is that the Reserve Bank of India is responsible for controlling
[Unknown]: inflation, which is setting the interest rate, and also borrowing money from the government,
[Guest 2]: because the Reserve Bank of India is the public debt manager on behalf of the government.
[Guest 3]: So obviously, they try to take and they're also the regulator for the banks.
[Guest 3]: That's the third point.
[Guest 2]: So they're also regulating the banks.
[Guest 2]: But once you take this away, then the conflict of interest goes away, then you no longer
[Guest 2]: need to manage the bonds of the government on behalf of the banks that you're regulating.
[Guest 2]: And you can go back to doing your inflation controlling thing, which you're supposed
[Guest 3]: to do.
[Guest 3]: So, you know, talking about the public debt thing, I think the government did try to come
[Guest 2]: up with a separate public debt office.
[Guest 2]: But it got completely squashed by the Reserve Bank of India, because of course, the Reserve
[Guest 3]: Bank of India doesn't want to let go of its territory.
[Guest 3]: You work for an institution which owns Reserve Bank of India, sorry, which is owned by Reserve
[Guest 2]: Bank of India.
[Guest 3]: These views are entirely my own.
[Guest 3]: Be personal.
[Guest 3]: Please make that disclaimer.
[Guest 1]: That's my disclaimer.
[Guest 1]: Which is what I wanted to tell you.
[Guest 1]: But this, you know, this is more general than just the RBI, right?
[Guest 1]: We have a lot of cases, like recently, they did this for the National Housing Bank in
[Guest 1]: the last budget, they just resolved it.
[Guest 1]: It used to be the lender to housing finance companies and also their regulator, right?
[Guest 1]: And that's a dual function is a huge conflict of interest.
[Guest 1]: And the same thing with the RBI.
[Guest 1]: So India does this quite frequently, it comes from this attitude of like socialist control,
[Guest 1]: that I'm going to be your parent, and I'm going to give you the carrot when you want
[Guest 1]: and give you the stick when you want, as if I'm a perfect benevolent,
[Guest 3]: I'd say more than socialist control.
[Guest 2]: These are also, you know, institutions of the Raj which have held on.
[Guest 2]: And also the other, the broader point that I'm trying to make is, you know, we fall into
[Guest 2]: this trap of thinking that Indian government securities are safe assets.
[Guest 2]: You know, I mean, theoretically, your own government assets are safe.
[Guest 2]: But in practice, Indian government assets are not safe.
[Guest 2]: And that's something that we really need to understand, that if you want our banks and
[Guest 2]: financial institutions to be safe, you should not be holding GCECs.
[Guest 2]: You should be holding US government bonds, or UK government bonds, or diversified.
[Guest 2]: You don't put all your eggs in one basket.
[Guest 2]: And of course, the point is currency risk, then you hedge your currency risk.
[Guest 2]: Because it's now we really have to open our mindset to the thing that financial markets
[Guest 2]: have to be really liberalized, not liberalized in the sense that Indians mean it.
[Guest 2]: But basically have your currency hedging options and banks will hedge the currency risk, give
[Guest 2]: them the option of diversifying their portfolio into multiple assets, instead of taking them
[Guest 2]: into this colonial kind of a past where you only hold government securities.
[Guest 1]: I had a question for both of you on the SLR, right, which is, you know, didn't go down.
[Guest 1]: I mean, even though the SLR went down, there was a lot of lazy banking.
[Guest 1]: Do you think it's because of uncertainty, that there's so much uncertainty in the markets
[Guest 1]: and the economy is clearly going towards a downturn?
[Guest 2]: No, this is this is an old trend.
[Guest 2]: It's almost like a culture, you know, the banking culture today is that you hold a lot
[Guest 2]: of government securities because you want to be safe.
[Guest 2]: It's the safety thing is a safety thing that has been sold to us for years.
[Guest 3]: What happens is, so let's say if yields go up, and, you know, they have to sort of mark
[Guest 3]: down bond prices and face losses.
[Guest 3]: So then you know, RBI will come in and then they'll tell them okay, in this quarter, we'll
[Guest 3]: give you that leeway and all that rubbish happens.
[Guest 2]: There's a lot of nexus between the government, the RBI and the banks, right?
[Guest 2]: It works very comfortably for the banks.
[Guest 2]: And also because they have not opened up their own vision to this possibility that you can
[Guest 2]: diversify your portfolio holding foreign assets, because what foreign asset is a very dirty
[Guest 2]: word again, right?
[Guest 3]: No, but see, I mean, you know, I mean, I appreciate what she's saying, but ultimately, you know,
[Guest 3]: all governments are Ponzi schemes.
[Guest 3]: So as long as you keep running a fiscal deficit, another quote of the episode, it's so funny,
[Guest 1]: if you keep running a fiscal deficit and keep going into debt, we really shouldn't have
[Guest 1]: a population control policy because we need children to be, which is what I said, the
[Unknown]: government is contradicting itself.
[Guest 1]: No, because the music will stop when the children stop.
[Guest 2]: This point is related to my first reform that if you're going to tie the hands of the government,
[Guest 2]: another way of doing it is take away their captive markets, which through which they're
[Guest 2]: very easily financing the deficit, which is hurting the economy.
[Guest 2]: Because imagine banks are holding, let's say 20-25% of GCEX, 40% goes into priority sector
[Guest 2]: lending, how much is really available to get into the small, medium enterprises and industries,
[Guest 2]: nothing.
[Guest 2]: So how do you do this job crisis solving when there is no money coming for investment?
[Guest 3]: Which is also why the, you know, the priority sector, you know, also keeps getting redefined.
[Guest 1]: Exactly.
[Unknown]: Exactly.
[Guest 1]: I have never understood this priority sector business.
[Guest 3]: It's again a nationalization, socialization.
[Guest 3]: It started in 1969.
[Guest 3]: And first what they did was, the RBI for four, five years, I think in 73 or 74, they used
[Guest 3]: to just give broad directions.
[Guest 3]: Then they set up a number which said 33% has to go.
[Guest 3]: And then over a period of time, they included like housing loans are now, you know, up to
[Guest 3]: a certain size, not all.
[Guest 3]: And that size, I think is 45 lakhs, which is a huge number, get included in priority
[Guest 3]: sector lending.
[Guest 2]: Now, housing loan, if it's priority sector lending, then
[Guest 2]: Because you know, the dichotomy is we dream of becoming a $5 trillion economy, but we
[Guest 2]: in every which way we behave that we are a really poor country, so which needs to be
[Guest 2]: handheld and shown the way.
[Guest 1]: Another thing, I don't understand the goal of being a $5 trillion economy.
[Unknown]: I think that's a separate podcast altogether.
[Amit Varma]: No, so what happens to Optic's fancy number?
[Amit Varma]: It's not even a good fancy number, because it means
[Amit Varma]: 5 trillion is a damn good number.
[Guest 1]: I like it.
[Guest 2]: Well, in real terms, no one knows what that means.
[Guest 2]: Exactly, but it's better than 5.2 trillion.
[Guest 2]: But I don't even understand what's the fuss about it, the rate at which we are fudging
[Guest 2]: numbers.
[Guest 2]: We can show next month that we've become a $5 trillion economy.
[Unknown]: It's just a question of perception.
[Unknown]: Or you could print a lot of money.
[Unknown]: Or just say that we have become a $5 trillion economy, who's checking?
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: So, GDP per capita is the best it's going to have.
[Unknown]: Reality versus narrative.
[Unknown]: I had a great episode on GDP with Rajeshwari by the way.
[Guest 3]: I did hear that.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Guest 2]: Everyone should listen to it.
[Guest 3]: So, that was my third
[Guest 3]: You wrote about that GDP deflator thing, right?
[Guest 3]: If I remember correctly.
[Guest 2]: Yes, yes, yes, yes.
[Guest 2]: This is the first time I thought someone's actually explained ki kya ho raha hai.
[Guest 2]: Since 2015, I wrote an article where I said the actual GDP growth is not 7.1%, it's 5%.
[Guest 2]: And that had become viral at that point of time.
[Guest 2]: But then, of course, now, Arvind Subramaniam has gone to the next level.
[Guest 1]: You know, things are so bad that the stuff economists are saying is going viral.
[Guest 1]: That's how badly they are fudging numbers.
[Unknown]: Normally, no one would read someone.
[Unknown]: And also, GDP is not something that would be in newspapers.
[Unknown]: It is the most unsexy
[Amit Varma]: Very reliable sources have told me Arvind Subramaniam does not know the G of GDP, but
[Guest 3]: we will not ask anyone to go on the record.
[Guest 3]: The best thing is, you know, we're talking about things going viral.
[Guest 3]: You know, the first forward I got after Chidambaram was arrested was, what is the first question
[Guest 3]: that CBI asked Chidambaram?
[Guest 3]: So the question was, what do we do about the economy?
[Guest 3]: I mean, that tells you.
[Amit Varma]: Well, listening to your conversation, the question also struck me that could Agent 007
[Amit Varma]: be described as a government bond?
[Amit Varma]: Never mind, let's move on to the final dream reform.
[Amit Varma]: So we can all actually end together before she leaves, and we can take a group photograph
[Guest 3]: because this is already the longest ever episode, so it's a historic moment.
[Guest 3]: We have recorded an episode longer than the episode I recorded with Manu Pillay.
[Amit Varma]: I have not beaten Manu Pillay.
[Unknown]: He is a very wonderful historian.
[Guest 3]: Yes, I disapprove of this kind of language.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so my reform is basically a dual reform, and all of you would kind of agree with it.
[Amit Varma]: And this again comes back to cities and urbanization.
[Amit Varma]: Reform 3A, do away with rent control.
[Amit Varma]: Reform 3B, reform FSI.
[Amit Varma]: Now, to just quickly explain both of these, rent control, on which I had an episode with
[Amit Varma]: Shruti's co-writer and good friend Alex Tabarrok, is this ludicrous law, which has crippled
[Amit Varma]: a lot of Mumbai, which is basically that at one point, government decided that rents are
[Amit Varma]: getting too high, let us fix the rents.
[Amit Varma]: So rents were fixed, which is why you go through Marine Drive and parts of South Bombay, you'll
[Amit Varma]: find people are paying 300 rupees a month, 200 rupees a month for these large lavish
[Amit Varma]: houses.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what does this do?
[Amit Varma]: What this does is that it reduces the incentives for the owners to look after their house.
[Amit Varma]: In one sense, it's not their house anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Their property has essentially been taken away from them.
[Amit Varma]: The same way governments, for example, to go back to my old rant, take away our bodies
[Amit Varma]: with something like family planning, assert their right over it.
[Amit Varma]: And what this has meant is that, number one, that there are large stretches of cities,
[Amit Varma]: you know, South Bombay just comes to mind very easily, where you have old dilapidated
[Amit Varma]: buildings where no one has the incentive to look after them.
[Amit Varma]: Number two, this reduces the housing supply.
[Amit Varma]: And what it means is that because the housing supply is so restricted, and not what it should
[Amit Varma]: be, that the rents and real estate prices are far more than they otherwise would be
[Amit Varma]: simple supply and demand.
[Amit Varma]: The second one is increasing FSI, FSI stands for floor space index, but what it basically
[Amit Varma]: means is that there is a limit to how tall you can build your building.
[Amit Varma]: Now, Bombay has an FSI of about one as far as I recall.
[Amit Varma]: And there are countries in the world which have like, I think New York has 15, parts
[Amit Varma]: of Hong Kong have 25-30.
[Amit Varma]: And again, I did an episode on this with Alex Tabarrok.
[Amit Varma]: And Alex coined a beautiful phrase, which was in fact the title of that episode, which
[Amit Varma]: is reclaim the sky.
[Amit Varma]: He said that what we have done in Mumbai is we have tried to reclaim the sea and there
[Amit Varma]: is a limit to that.
[Amit Varma]: But we can reclaim the sky and there is no limit to that.
[Amit Varma]: His argument is that FSI should be far, far more, let people build upwards.
[Amit Varma]: And the typical objections which are made against increasing FSI is that our infrastructure
[Amit Varma]: is already crumbling, public services already crumbling, they won't keep pace.
[Amit Varma]: But the same objection has been used before FSI has been raised in other cities across
[Amit Varma]: the world at different stages of development.
[Amit Varma]: And what inevitably happens is that supply catches up with demand, and the infrastructure
[Amit Varma]: and public services do well enough.
[Amit Varma]: What this will really do is if you increase FSI, is because people will be building upwards
[Amit Varma]: and building more, land prices will come down, rentals will come down, more people will be
[Amit Varma]: able to move into the city at a lesser cost.
[Amit Varma]: Again, all the benefits of population density, larger economic networks, and, you know, to
[Amit Varma]: an extent less slums, and it's just, you know, it's a no brainer why we don't do it.
[Guest 1]: And elevators can substitute for cars.
[Amit Varma]: And elevators can, which is such a radical thought when you think about it.
[Guest 1]: Well, Tim Harford has written about this also.
[Guest 1]: And he, you know, in his book on 50 great innovations, do you know, do you remember
[Guest 1]: the title of the book?
[Guest 1]: 50 great something of the 50 great innovations.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, just look, just look for Tim Harford's book.
[Guest 1]: I think there's a chapter on the elevator road, it's mentioned somewhere there.
[Guest 1]: Elevators are a mass transit system when you reclaim the skies, and they reduce congestion
[Guest 1]: on the roads.
[Guest 1]: And they are environmentally friendly, because you can carpool, if elevators are actually
[Guest 1]: a substitute for a car.
[Guest 1]: And they are substitutes for metro and so many more things.
[Guest 1]: And so it's also a very green idea.
[Guest 3]: Yeah.
[Guest 3]: So basically, again, frivolous point, but now, you know, if there was no FSI, and there
[Guest 3]: was no rent control in the city of Bombay, Bombay as it used to be, we wouldn't have
[Guest 3]: got two very beautiful songs from Gulzar.
[Guest 3]: So, you know, ek akela shahar mein abu dana dhundta hai, do diwane shahar mein abu dana
[Amit Varma]: dhundta hai.
[Amit Varma]: First time I heard it, I heard it as sabudana and I'm like, okay, even I like that, you
[Guest 3]: know, sabudana khichdi.
[Guest 3]: It's a terrible name, you can do better than that.
[Guest 3]: No, I really thought so.
[Unknown]: You like sabudana khichdi?
[Unknown]: I am a huge fan of sabudana khichdi.
[Unknown]: It's not bird feed or whatever you call poha.
[Unknown]: Look, I don't eat all vegetables.
[Unknown]: But I think that's a great connection that Vivek has made, let's please appreciate it.
[Guest 3]: Sorry, I got distracted, the moment you said frivolous, I thought I should add to it.
[Guest 3]: No, so what I basically said that, you know, if it wasn't for FSI and rent control, then
[Guest 2]: we wouldn't have got two great Gulzar songs.
[Guest 2]: And even that entire romanticism about coming to Bombay, looking for a place to stay, that
[Guest 1]: would completely go.
[Guest 2]: But what I should point out
[Guest 1]: I think we would have gotten two other great Gulzar songs.
[Guest 1]: Which would be?
[Guest 1]: I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: Something about reclaiming the skies, maybe.
[Amit Varma]: Opportunity, cost and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But I have to point out that in the magazine I used to edit, Pragati, we had a section
[Amit Varma]: called Houseful Economics.
[Amit Varma]: And I used exactly those songs to make exactly this point on FSI and rent control.
[Amit Varma]: So great minds think alike.
[Amit Varma]: And we are done with our 12 reforms.
[Amit Varma]: That was quick.
[Amit Varma]: Great happiness has come.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti is already checking her Twitter.
[Guest 1]: Are you checking your Twitter, Shruti?
[Guest 1]: I'm not checking my Twitter.
[Guest 1]: I'm just telling people that I am no longer a prisoner here.
[Amit Varma]: It is so good to have you here in person.
[Guest 3]: And guys, thanks a lot for
[Guest 3]: Just one more point.
[Guest 3]: In fact, there is another lesson in economics from the song Do Diwane Ish Chahar Mein.
[Guest 3]: So there is a shot of Marine Drive, beautiful shot.
[Guest 3]: And so if you remember your Marine Drive, you know, just before the Chowpatty starts
[Guest 3]: or around where the Chowpatty is, there is this bridge, right?
[Guest 3]: So there is a shot of that bridge and there is a shot of all these cars there.
[Guest 3]: And the only thing you see, you know, are, you know, all these premier Padminis.
[Guest 3]: And then there is this Mercedes, one Mercedes that you see there.
[Guest 3]: So that again tells you, you know, how socialist or how government controlled our economy was
[Guest 3]: where we had only two car models for almost 50 years, 45, 46 years after independence.
[Guest 2]: I think what Vivek is trying to say is that if we start dreaming now at some point of
[Amit Varma]: time, 40, 50 years later, we might land up where we want to be.
[Amit Varma]: And ever since he has seen that, well, I mean, you know the GST of Mercedes, right?
[Guest 3]: Do you know the GST of premier Padmini?
[Guest 3]: No, you do not.
[Guest 3]: Premier Padmini toh band ho gayi.
[Amit Varma]: But we don't exist anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Bachchi kaha?
[Amit Varma]: Fiat, as you used to
[Amit Varma]: Premier Padmini kaun bulata hai?
[Guest 3]: We used to also
[Guest 3]: Fiat, Fiat, Fiat.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, Fiat gadi gaye hain.
[Amit Varma]: We had one when I was a kid in the 80s.
[Guest 3]: We had an ambassador.
[Guest 2]: Sorry Vivek.
[Guest 2]: In Calcutta roads, that was the only thing that could actually work.
[Guest 3]: So then it was also a function of the fact that the ambassador was made
[Amit Varma]: In Bengal, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: It is no surprise that in an episode titled Dream Reforms, we are dreaming of the past.
[Amit Varma]: This shows what our country has come to, guys.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on the scene again, Sen.
[Guest 2]: Thank you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, then let us know on Twitter and kindly recommend
[Amit Varma]: to all your friends, do them a favor.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Shruti on Twitter at srajgopalan.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Vivek at call underscore Vivek.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at amitvarma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can't follow Rajeshwari because she is not on social media.
[Amit Varma]: So what do I tell you now?
[Amit Varma]: There is a Twitter crisis also.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and The Unseen at sceneunseen.in, thinkpragati.com
[Amit Varma]: and ivmpodcast.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and The Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution, an independent center
[Amit Varma]: for research and education in public policy.
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila offers 12-week courses in public policy, technology policy, strategic studies
[Amit Varma]: for both full-time students and working professionals.
[Amit Varma]: Visit takshashila.org.in for more details.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for still listening.
[Amit Varma]: Are you still there?
[Amit Varma]: What are you doing?
[Unknown]: Do something else.
[Unknown]: Do you wish you were smarter?
[Unknown]: Well, so do we.
[Unknown]: But the next best thing?
[Unknown]: We could make you sound smarter.
[Unknown]: And to help you with this endeavor, we are Simplified, a podcast that attempts to break
[Unknown]: down the complex world around you with a little knowledge, a lot of poor jokes and a ton of
[Unknown]: random trivia.
[Unknown]: Episodes out every Monday on the IVM podcast app or wherever you get your podcasts.
[Unknown]: We'll see you next time on Simplified.